~~~~ 
title: On Romance
type: post
status: publish
id: 50
category: Curious cases
~~~~

Why now? Well, March is coming, and I feel romance in this month (and in
September)  for various reasons. One ofcourse that this time, Nature
sheds its old clothes and wears new, and my birthday also falls in this
month. Besides, living in Delhi means after the long and chilling cold[,
your fingers and toes are now spared to
feel](http://www.stlyrics.com/songs/t/troggs11047/loveisallaround350937.html)
anything but cold. And if you are from a Village in North India then the
glimpse of 'mustard field' in March make you understand the whole
concept behind the the song 'Yellow' by Coldplay. Yes, these fields
suits well with this song.\
\
This year was less embarrassing/trouble-less since valentine day was on
Sunday. No office!! so there war no one to ask things. So I spend all of
my Sunday in my room reading the books just arrived who was written by
scholars who might never had wondered about Valentine Day (or perhaps
Romance must have happened in their mind). When I got tired after
reading the same stuff, I borrowed 'Times of India' from one of fellow
Paying Guest. *Debonair* could have been a better option, but you can
not ask for it from anyone. There is no reluctance here since it is
called a newspaper, more acceptable idea. I read it, and guess what,[I
realised how much the idea of romance has
changed.](http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/specialcoverage/5564293.cms) 
My favorite newspaper, TheHindu, is very boring. It does not have any
sexy things (girls?) in it, not even in its city supplements. Perhaps
that is why it is called 'leftist'. There is no advertisement of
'*Meethi meethi baatein karo*' and worst, no horoscope. I got an awesome
knowledge on romance, that mainly deals with sexy gifts, sexy sex, sexy
touch, and not to mention sexy articles. Its was a delight to read, most
of the article help you to convince yourself that the soul purpose of
the girls are to please men. [But this is only a tip of
iceberg](http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2010/feb/26/sexualisation-children-parental-guidance-editorial).
And who would mind reading something sexy. But curiosity kills every
joy. But even if you read non-sexy things to feed your curiosity then
also after some time while lying in you bed you realize that more you
know, more frustrated you get since you have control over nothing.\
\
This idea of romance (the corporate media definition) is only for dudes.
The first objective of dude-hood is to get laid as early as possible
else you are not dude enough or are simply gay. There are few many
non-dudes around. Unfortunately, I grew up reading them like Premchand,
Dinker, Mahadevi Verma, Jaishankar Prasad, Harishchadra, Shukla, Purn
Singh, Agyey, Renu, Kamala Das, Renu and many other poor Hindi-writers;
so in spite of colossal opportunities that a sugarcane field provide in
my Village, I am still virgin. Thats not to say that it is part of my
dignity, more or less it is the lack of enthusiasm in these kinds of
stuff. Stuff, which Indians generally consider/considered unethical.\
\
But education can kill [any
ethics](http://www.galilean-library.org/manuscript.php?postid=43866).
There are lot of magazines just to do that. I could have really dropped
down the idea that casual sex is unethical, had I been an ardent reader
of TOI, which I am not, or an ardent watcher of M.TV, which I am not
either. Worse I read Ruskin Bond, who says in his book 'the India I
love', ".....since the possibility of romance was there in my life, I
declined his offer to go with him to prostitute..." I liked it, and
ignored the fact that he got neither. But I'd love to live his life, so
I keep his advise; or should I take clues from 'Dev-D'. Anyway, I like
the way I am ruining my sexual life.\
\
[Valentine Day](http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/valentines-day),
now epitomises the day of romance, is grossly commersiled. Neither I
like it, nor I ever get the chance to do so. In my school days, unlikely
for someone from Village those days, I knew about this day. This day, I
never had anything to say, a rare thing to happen otherwise. Anything
controversial in India (especially in North) becomes part of her
culture. So we are seeing the the emergence of Valentine day not because
that it really means anything to Indian-love (we have so many role
models, Laila Majnu, and otehers.. just go google) but it gives the
opportunity to build brands values. So on one hand Bajrang Dal, Shiv
Sena etc can increase their brand values in their supporters by
demonising it, and on the other hand corporate media can gets its own
share by supporting it and ofcourse never forget the market, giving
special discounts on viagra. And we, a poor generation, who is got
caught in having a casual relationship and soul-mate hunting, just can't
get less confused. We accept it,quite blindly and get more confused
about what is romance and then to kill this confusion we turn to check
our compatibility with the one we suppose to love with 'Kundli Pro'
(astrology) and not to [mention all the other compatibility
test](http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life/relationships/man-woman/Formula-to-predict-time-for-love-marriage/articleshow/5560031.cms),
travesty of statistics. Who says *'andh-vishwas*' will die with
education? But if a rural fold do it, he is '*andhvishwasi'*. If a
degree-holder does it, well that you should know!\
\
Lets leave 'why valentine?' altogether[. Others have a lot to
say](http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2010/feb/12/valentines-day-commercialised).
The very purpose of this day seems to express your feelings. These days
Valentine Day's cards sold over 1 billion around the world. I wonder who
was the first man who send this card. He must have been very shy or very
unattractive or both (Hunchback of Notre-dam? Nah.. thats Disney, they
are too dreamy!!) and must have send it anonymously knowing very well
that it could never be requited. For their recipients, it could bring
the joy at guessing who was the poor creature who fancied them ( They
might have used it to increase their reputation among *peers*,
Thankfully for him there was no mobile, orkut or Facebook those days
else before his message reaching her, others gossips would have reached
him.).\
\
 These day, yes in my time, people use text messages and emails (which I
also tried, and now horribly regret the very idea) which by the way
reaffirmation of a relationships which suppose to exist in his mind
(yes, that what I meant by regretting the very idea, it might have been
slightly offensive also.) People argue that don't tell her the truth
about how you feel or else you will scare her, or a relationships always
starts with pretty lies. Reallly? I continued with writing letters, not
anonymously (this is just sissy). And I use postal services, who the
hell will train a pigeon! Anyway it helps since its very hard for me to
open my mouth in front of a girl I like, this is also quite sissy, but
it is good also, unless I speak there is hope!! (Personal advise : Do
not write email, sms or letters after watching 'Little Manhattan'.
Honesty seems to scare a hell out of people! ). \
\
The idea of romance is really strong unless one is not an animal, which
are a lot these days in human form. But 'romance with whom', that idea
might disappear overnight to be replaced with the idea of someone else -
more or less - (As Beatles loved to sing... *Love has the nasty habit of
disappearing overnight..*But they can not be trusted.. They also
sung..*In my life...*Oh the lover of memories.. First sign of getting
old). Few ideas are really hard to hold on to, no matter how dear they
are to you. Well, thats life (or character?). Cant say....\
Going to '[Southern
Cross](http://www.sing365.com/music/lyric.nsf/Southern-Cross-lyrics-Crosby-Stills-Nash-and-Young/3B215B089F402BC548256D9900247447)'....\
\
with Love \
dilawar
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-8436171749933519705?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
