~~~~ 
title: In praise of: The Pariah Dog
type: post
status: publish
id: 166
tag: Indian pariah dog
tag: M Krishnan on Pariah dog
category: In Praise Of
~~~~

'The Pariah dog', wrote an acute observer of Indian ways, 'has always
been on downhill slope of popular contempt'.  Natives ignore his 'novel
potentialities of his characters' and discourage him by 'keeping him at
a distance'. He is denied affection to which its British counterpart has
a social claim. The Pariah dog longs for a master; a mere approving look
touches a chord is it heart. Compared with English dog, says Kipling, 
'the poor Indian outcast is a pagan, a creature without faith, or at
least without that soul-saving reverence for authority which ennobles
character' and concluded rightly that 'the Pariah does not know the joy
of adoration' for he has no master. [1] The name 'Pariah' given to him
is 'tainted with the  worst of the philosophy' to which centuries ago in
Greece, 'he reveals more of the currish side of canine character.' He
snarls more often than a civilised dogs and uncovers more of his teeth.
Despite this quarrelsome nature, Kipling judged him as a 'lendi', a
coward since 'in a fight he does not abandon himself to the delight of
battle with stern joy of the English dog, but calculates odds backs down
with an ignoble care for his skin.' Keeping a dog in one's house was not
a respected thing to do in not-so-modern Indian culture. It is hard to
say since when Indian started tolerating the presence of dog in their
houses. Historian points to an English influence which can not be
denied. The 'best friend of man' has been officially condemned by both
Hindu and Muslim authorities. He is not allowed inside the house and
often beaten up if it dares do so. But his faithfulness was often
rewarded. At least by Yuddhishtra who refused to go to heaven unless his
dog might accompany him. There is [no place for dogs in Hindu
heaven](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0096787/). A very vulgar saying
gives many clues about Indian attitude, "If all the dogs go on
pilgrimage to Benares, who will be left to lick the dishes clean". Manu
have decreed many things against the dog. I am not aware of kindly words
said in appreciation of a dog's admirable side by a Hindu or Muslim
poet. A vast majority of Indian Pariah dogs still live on street and is
attached with a place rather than a person. They are infamous for their
chronic hunger. Even if you fill your pet Pariah till its nose with
food, it would sneak into your kitchen and taste whatever it could find.
It is aware of his misdeed. It dashes off from the kitchen at any sign
of trouble. It would not return till hunger grips it again. On its
unwelcome return, it shows a remarkable desire to flaunt its cuteness.
It wags its tail for no reason and it tries to give a very innocent look
by keeping its head low and making a eye contact from that angle. After
slowing approaching its master, it would lay down in his/her feet asking
for forgiveness. I would not call him 'a lendy', a coward but it is not
a a brave dog either. In the presence of his master or in a pack, he
might do great things by showing admirable courage. But once alone, it
will never face odds if it can help it. It is very curious in the matter
of reptiles. It likes to explore them with utmost care. Sometimes it
misjudges the danger and get itself hurt. There have been many
incidences in my village where a dog was bitten by scorpion. Indian
Pariah have few claims to looks. It is rare to find a Pariah dog with
both of its ears straight. However it has many other qualities which
will outweigh its lack of looks and 'conspicuous gallantry in action'.
According to M. Krishnan, Indian Pariah 'is tractable, clever,  even
sagacious, self-reliant and most importantly absolutely incorruptible.'
By personal experience I can vouch for his loyalty.  There is no better
house-dog. It is hardy and cost next to nothing to feed. 'It never make
friends with strangers whatever the bait, and will wake and give voice
to the slightest suspicion of anything wrong.' It does not howl all
night but only bark when there is a need. It is this quality, rather
than its willingness to sink its teeth into stranger's flesh, which
makes it a great dog. It is clever but you can not teach him 'fetching
the ball' for it is usually not interested in thrown things which does
not smell eatable. It is clever in managing his food and love related
affairs. It usually leaves its master house and spend its time in
jungles when its time comes to an end but it always comes back in its
last few hours to its master house to expire. No pet Pariah dog in my
village is known to die outside its master house. I believe that Pariah
has been improved in its look and has been established as a breed. These
are welcome signs. It would be pity if this dogs is allowed to meet the
same fate as of Poligar and Mahratta. END NOTES : [1] 'A popular sketch
of Indian animals in their relations with people', John Lockwood
Kipling. [2] The Pariah, M. N. Krishnan, Collected articles, 'Nature's
Spokesman', ed. Ramachandra Guha -- Dilawar  
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-693691403159396864?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
