~~~~ 
title: Writing and Speaking
type: post
status: publish
id: 150
tag: why Indians are bad at writing
tag: writing and speking
category: Indian Society
~~~~

> ...**For five years, I gave the shortlisted candidates for our M.Tech
> (IT) entrance a short second test. In one of the questions, I would
> ask them to write something in English about their family, then
> rewrite the same thing in their mother-tongue or in any other Indian
> language they knew. Invariably, people who wrote bad English also
> wrote bad Hindi, bad Marathi, bad Telugu, etc. My belief, therefore,
> is that poor writing is a result of lack of mental discipline to write
> properly. Also, it is language-independent. If you’re good in one
> language, it means you’ve disciplined your mind to write well and
> carefully. Then you usually imbibe that discipline when writing in
> another language. Inadequate preparation on the topic may be one
> aspect, but invariably, lack of discipline and training in writing is
> the problem.**

Prof. Deepak Pathak

CSE, IIT Bombay

Raintree, Jan-Feb 2011

'How bad am I with writing!', it first occurred to me when I was writing
my under-graduate thesis. The work was embed in my mind but I found it
very difficult to put it on paper elegantly. This bad-writing I am
concerned here is not about spelling and grammar mistakes  - this blog
has an unhealthy number of them - but rather how I wove my thoughts
together. Same situation popped itself up once again when I sat down to
write my master's thesis. After spending 3 years (and counting) as
teaching assistant and reading many reports and writing few, I can say
with some confidence that I am not alone who lacks the ability of
writing well structured and elegant prose. Indians seem to be at much
more ease with spoken rather than written word. They speak eloquently
and to a great length with evident pleasure but their writing is often
hasty and careless. There are vast number of Indians who lack the
ability to put written words altogether. But there are many others who
has the capacity; and my purpose is to comment on how they use and
misuse it. There is of course first-rate poets, writers, columnists but
my intention is not to comment on individual talent. Indians just excel
at the spoken words. After all we hold the record of longest speech in
UN assembly. Anyone who belongs to that large and very ill-defined
category called 'public intellectual' can speak at any length and on any
subject. One has to switch on the television as tune into some
panel-discussion. The curious fact about these intellectual speeches is
that speaker hardly refer to any note or reference and often talk
without much application of mind. Also they do not like being
interrupted or corrected while they are talking. I am not sure whether
they feel the same way should anyone correct their writings. Here, I
wish to share an[experience of Andre
Beteille](http://www.telegraphindia.com/1050407/asp/opinion/story_4519797.asp)when
he gave lectures at two premier universities each of which was chaired
by vice-chancellor of university concerned. The first lecture was at
University of Cambridge where the VC was a distinguished medical
scientist. He introduced him briefly and, after he finished his lecture,
also thanked him briefly. As they were walking out, he told Beteille
that he had greatly enjoyed his lecture. When Beteille remonstrated that
he was merely being polite, he quietly took out the notes which he took
during lectures which ran into three pages: he had come to the lecture
to listen rather than to speak.  At other lecture in the Indian
university, the vice-chancellor arrived thirty-five minutes late while
the speaker and audience waited. Having arrived late, he embarked on a
lengthy and eloquent speech on the challenges facing the country and the
need for teachers and students to rise up to them. By the time he sat
down and Beteille began his lectures on whose preparation he had spent
more than a month, it became evident that audience had lost interest in
it. As to taking notes, no self-respecting vice-chancellor in India
takes notes at a lecture given by a mere professor. Back in my village
where literacy level is well below national average, educated people are
called '*padhe likhe log'*(people who can read and write). For them, the
ability to speak is not impressive since anyone of them can speak at any
length. And it counts for little unless it is in English. Indeed, there
is a peculiar attitude towards English language, especially among urban
middle class. The command over English language, which is very unevenly
distributed among them, is not only a very important intellectual asset
but also a yardstick to measure one's social status. An Indian takes
perverse pleasure in correcting and improving other's English by which
she establishes not only her intellectual but also social superiority
over others. Perhaps lack of reading also hinder growth of writing
skills. It is also interesting to note that libraries in India are not
only hard to find; they are also least used on per capita basis. Unlike
many Western countries, buying and reading books for entertainment is
not in our culture. Indians prefer to buy a book only if it serves some
specific purpose and has a long shelf life. I am of the view that one
can not go very far in developing ideas without reading good books or
conversing with thoughtful people. It is much easier to access former
than the later. Many believes that this lack of writing 'good' prose is
due to use of foreign language. If there is problem with language than
why they use it or chose to write at such immoderate length when the
language is forced on them? It is only a part of the picture as the
experience of Prof. Pathak shows. Perhaps the most important reason is
the lack of care and patience which is hard to notice while one is
speaking.  This same lack of measure and discipline shows itself vividly
in written discourse which can easily be found in our judicial and in
academic prose. I have read in many news stories that our Supreme Court
judgments run into thousand of pages. Mr. Nani Palkhiwala had once
observed that this shows the Indian preoccupation with eternity and
infinity. By their very nature, writing and reading are solitary
activities. Speaking, on the other hand, is a way of being gregarious.
[The Indian is gregarious by
nature](http://dilawarsays.blogspot.com/2011/05/privacy-secrecy-and-indians.html).
He finds is very hard to be alone unless he a sanyasi or a poet. From
childhood he grows in the company of others: relatives of uncountable
denominations. He is never allowed to be himself and made to believe
that being himself is a way of being selfish and arrogant. And as he
grows in status in society, so does his visitors in number and variety.
I have always found myself perplexed noticing how much time Indian
academician are able to spent in other's company. One often wonders how
much time they have to think something and work on them? What quality
their research would be, if any? I do not have any experience of
academic life in West but it is hard not to notice the difference - by
looking at the amount of time they put in writing. It rarely happens
that an Indian professor prepares notes to make them available on his
home page or to circulate in the classroom. In West, it seems to be a
primary activity of a Professor's academic life. Their home pages are
filled with notes, informations, and tutorials even though similar
material is available outside. That much of writing is not possible
without spending a significant time is solitude. It is not to say that
academicians in the West do not spent time in committees and meetings
but they must be aware of the time they need to be by themselves.
Successful Indian academics like to complain endlessly of the time they
have to spend on committee and meetings, but their complains need not
taken seriously. They cherish nothing more than being surrounded by
people before whom they can hold forth; what they can possibly not bear
is being themselves. The ability of writing good prose does not emanate
entirely from intelligence or from facility with the language. Writing
is a solitary art which requires patience and care and a certain kind of
emotional investment. If a person spent so much in being gregarious, she
can not be put a concentrated effort in writing. Of course, there are
masters of both spoken and written words. These individuals are
outstanding and therefore are not confined by the circumstances but able
to rise above them. In technical education, of which I have first hand
experience, this lack of patience and care is evident in code or design
students submit for their assignments. These erroneous designs and buggy
codes, with their carelessly written reports which says little on how
the design is build or code is written, which are of little worth, are
accepted and graded. What is troubling that even the most technically
sound student writes hastily and with little care for reader. Often her
writing does not match her technical abilities. Contrasting this with my
experience on many on-line discussion forum located in west; I was
amazed to read carefully written and extremely lucid answers provided by
[academicians to questions
posed](http://math.stackexchange.com/questions/18315/free-vector-space-and-vector-space).
On these on-line communities, they are very strict about style of
writings and community standards, and they protect them jealously. It
would not strain one's credulity to believe that there is some
difference in general orientation between cultures towards this very
important academic activity as Prof. Andre Beteille puts it, '*some
culture tolerate careless, vacuous and disjointed writing while other
discourage it*.'   Related Article : [1]
http://www.paulgraham.com/speak.html -- Dilawar

![](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2011/08/9fb88-3794193585985230867-382271670502464508.gif)
