~~~~ 
title: Concern with JEE, merit etc in IITs
type: post
status: publish
id: 175
tag: iit bombay
tag: Indian Institute of Technology Joint Entrance Examination
category: IIT Bombay
~~~~

Today I found a rather peculiar email in my inbox. It was sent to IITB
general mailing list, meant for notification about events on the campus.
This email was written for anyone  'who is concerned with IIT Bombay
future'. Thus I read it. The sender is a member of student body. He was
disappointed with the little interests shown by IIT Bombay student
community for the debate on new single entrance examination proposed of
Government of India. The sender was aware that this mailing list is not
meant for such message but he made his case by claiming that 'desperate
times need desperate measures'. This shows how deep feelings are running
in some of them. Speaking by experience, IITs mean middle classes. These
institutes are craved by them because they help them in fulfilling their
material if not intellectual aspirations. Reservation might have helped
a few of them who are from a poor background but its effect on
class-composition of the campus are limited for the benefits of
reservation usually goes to the least disadvantaged member of a
disadvantaged group. This recent decision by government to give
weightage to board examination while preparing merit list for IITs is
perhaps formulated with the intentions that it will make IITs more
accessible to larger section of lower middle-class. The coaching centers
are costly and can be afforded only by upper middle class which gives
them an unfair advantages over sons and daughters of lower middle and
working class people who can barely afford a good school. The intentions
of government are definitely of right kind. The debate around the
admission process of IIT largely a debate by middle-class with
middle-class. If the opinion on JEE differs then it shows the Indian
middle class have fragmented. Until a decade ago, Indian middle class
has a easy ride with its opinions. When it was very small compared to
total population, it spoke in one voice and without much dissent. This
is not the case anymore. Many students find it hard to be convinced that
new system will take the pressure off them. On such matters, a IIT
Bombay student have expressed his mind in [Hindu
newspaper](http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-opinion/article3503036.ece).
This has something to do with perception of examinations. In secondary
school, as the pupil progresses from one class to another, the prospect
of examinations begins to loom large. Indians have somewhat peculiar
attitude towards examination. One of our anthropologist have noted that

> For pupils and their parents, board examinations are a trial, and for
> the school teachers and management, they are a perennial source of
> vexation. Examination distract seriously from the ordinary course of
> teaching and learning. Testing and examining are a major function of
> all modern Institutes worldwide but in India, they tends to
> marginalize the main function of education, which are learning and
> teaching. One indication of this is the widespread suspicion and
> exposure of malpractice in examinations.

>  Successful performance in board examinations does not depend only on
> what is taught and learnt in school. In many secondary school very
> little teaching is done and students have to rely on external
> tuitions. Even those who gets into best school try to secure admission
> to most coveted colleges via tuitions and coaching centers. Once
> begin, competition  for coveted colleges acquires its own momentum and
> it is difficult to see how competition can be abolished without
> abolishing the middle class, as happened, although briefly in China.

Indian  middle class have always valued competitions and have admired
individual agency.  Various coaching centers outside schools are used to
enhance the pupil's competitive edge. But one should not overlook the
role the family plays in shaping senses of a young pupil for these
competitions.  Not only natural abilities and aptitude, individual
initiative and effort of a student are important; one's family
economical, social and cultural capital, pedagogy and practices in
school, care and attention a pupil receives from school and family plays
an equally decisive role. They may work against each other or reinforce
each other. If the government policy to give weightage to board
examinations are designed to mitigate resulting inequalities in
educational performance creating by 'elite' coaching centers then it
would be worth a shot but it would be a policy for disaster if the
intentions behind such a move to wish out these inequalities. One can
not remove inequality without removing family for the contribution of 
family  in creating, reproducing and sustaining inequality in a society
is immense than compared to any other social institute. But is there any
other social institute which can fulfill the role of family? If this
policy has not  taken serious note of disparities between different
schools, boards and the inequalities in wider society which they are
part of, then outcome of this policy could be anything but desired. The
intention of government behind such a decision may have been great  but
a seed sown with great intention need not bear desired fruits and often
it bears poisonous fruits. To be fair, govt. of India is not abolishing
entrance examination, neither it is taking away the right to conduct
such entrance examination from IITs. As far as I know, government has
agreed that IIT will conduct an entrance examination which will be used
by all colleges across India. The IIT council, a body consisting of
government officials as well as academicians, have also proposed that a
significant weightage should be given to board examinations. [PS : They
have agreed on some other formula]. This model is proposed not only to
check the menace of coaching centers, also to send the signal to schools
that Indian institutes of professional learning are now willing to
accept students who can compensate their below-expected performance in
PCM (physics, chemistry and mathematics) by performing well in non-PCM
subject in their schools. Homo Indicus is a class conscious species. An
Indian shows a great liking for collecting highly prized social symbols
which he or she uses for upward social mobility. In villages, you can
see them running after high-school diploma. In cities they hanker after
foreign degrees with equal passion. This obsession may look odd to some
observers but it is all too natural for in their communities a premium
is put on these possessions. High-end mobiles phones, as well as branded
clothes may also serve as status symbol in their peer groups, if not in
larger society. IIT entrance examination, commonly know as JEE, has
become a social symbol which has a pan-Indian appeal for middle class
students.  Most of Indian students with mathematics as a subject in
their school, who think of themselves sharp enough, try their skills in
this exam. Success in such highly competitive entrance examination not
only gives a sense of confidence but also a sense of social and
intellectual superiority. Successful candidates who enters into IITs
brands themselves IITians and often speaks on themselves in
superlatives. A cursory look at the t-shirts designed by them on campus
says it all. All students from respected campuses like to brand
themselves. But a student of 2nd tier Indian institute perceive himself
differently vis a vis a student of IIT than a student of Harvard sees
himself vis a vis a student of MIT. A sense of inferiority makes other
students very conscious in the presence of IITians. It was virtually
unknown in the past but increasingly common in campuses these days. In
addition to IITs, students of few other Institutes in India such as
IIMs, also like to see themselves collectively. When such collective
identities becomes a part of an individual psyche, they feel threatened
whenever someone is seen to transgress or alter it. Indians have lived
with shared identities based on religion, language, castes and
communities for a long time. They have also shown that no matter how
peaceful they normally are, they are also quite capable of protecting
these identities by turning violent. And IITians can turn into
reactionaries, if not violent, when their shared identities are
threatened. So it is all too natural that IIT students (read UGs) will
protest against replacing JEE with something else. Recently they have
protested against opening up new IITs on the ground that new IITs will
devalue the brand of IITs. I fail to see how opening new IITs in a
mediocre educational system can devalue IITs? Are they concerned about
IIT as a symbol seen collectively?  That IIT Gandhinagar might devalue
IIT Bombay because they share a common first name? Not only it is hard
to understand their motives when they speak in the name of quality and
merit, there is little intellectual value in what they say. The noise is
always that [there is some evil intention or hidden
hand](http://dsanghi.blogspot.in/2012/06/jee-2013-open-letter.html)
especially when they find policy is not of their liking. Some of the
faculty members, especially if they are graduated from IITs, might also
join them in their protest. It is not to say the all faculty members who
have graduated from IITs are going to protest or all those who are
protesting are IITs graduates. It also depends on the extent to which he
or she has diluted these shared identities or replaced them with
something more personal. Or whether over the time he or she have come to
identify himself or herself as IITians despite of that fact he has
graduated from somewhere else. One likes to replace less-valued
identities with more valued one. If a person is known for his work then
it is expected that he care less whether he is an IITian or not. It is
far from my intention to suggest that all those who are complaining
about it are solely driven by matter of identities. Some will protest on
the matter of principle, ideology, rights, social justice, and last but
not least, ego. But it will be hard to prove that they are not
protesting because some personal feelings are hurt even if they are
speaking in the name of 'merit', 'efficiency', 'autonomy' etc. One can
of-course put forward many sound arguments in defense and protest.
Intellectual do not change their stand unless the evidence on the
contrary are overwhelming. Arguments against the policy of social
inclusion are anything but overwhelming. Moreover, the success in the
matter of public policy need not depend on arguments only when public
sympathy is on the other side. Public sympathy is not an inexhaustible
commodity and it is known to change sides quite rapidly if not handled
with sensitivity it deserves. Ask our Prime Minister. These days no body
makes a noise in support of Manmohan Singh that his government may be
corrupt but our Prime Minister is the most educated one since Jawahar
Lal and the most honest since the time of Lal Bahadur Shashtri. IITs
still enjoys a great public sympathy but our public intellectuals are
not willing to go easy on IITians even if they are young : a species
have now become notorious for serving its own interests and labs and
universities of US and Europe. These young IITians sometimes shows a
[remarkable condescend](http://save-iit-jee.blogspot.in/). A better
known among them have not
[spared](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/article2042877.ece) even
his professors. It is crass to note after snubbing the larger public in
fair weather they long for their sympathy and support in rough one.
Moreover their claim of intellectual superiority by virtue of passing
JEE are at best suspicious. IITs have not produced, or at least are not
known to produce, a Bose or a Raman. Even a Kalam,  a M.
Vishweshwaraiah, a P. Sainath, or a Ramachandra Guha have not come from
their ranks. Their best products, or at least the best known products,
are known to prefer businesses of greenbacks rather than matter of gray
cells. The almost total migration towards multinational corporation and
European or American universities have only made the matter worse. The
point is that even if someone is speaking in defense of IITians, he can
easily be shown his place in larger scheme of social issues by pointing
out these self-serving behaviors. Nonetheless, it can not be a valid
argument for social inclusion for it is very unlikely that after a
changed admission process, these new students whether trained in school
or coaching center will not follow the same path. But such arguments
serves as a great way to hush then up. Although much better that other
Indian universities in the matter of autonomy, IITs have been somewhat
slow to adapt to the changing aspirations of large and ever expanding
middle-class of India. In India, it is usually the government which
formulates the policy. Indian university decides whether to implement it
or take an evasive action. If the coaching culture is so bad for our
unequal society then what was stopping IITs to check in this menace by
themselves? Why wait government to act and put themselves in such an
awkward situation? After all IIT senate understands academic matter much
better than Indian government and is aware of social composition of the
society outside India at large. If they did not consider it a serious
problem or did not heed government advice then government has the right,
as well as the moral authority, to force it on them. The experience of
North American universities shows that policy of social inclusion is
beneficial for the society and university alike. It will great if a
university look a little more like the society it is part of. Social
inclusion has been used as a potent argument in defense of caste-based
reservation. Many people have been discussing the ills of class-division
on educational institute for a long time but it is perhaps the first
time that a decision was taken to counter the class-disparities on
campuses. Some have gone far to claim that right to admission should not
be restricted in universities for it will is equivalent of denying the
right of eduction to a large swath of population. But there is something
phony about such claims that university should be all-inclusive because
these claims are not strongly advocated for school and primary schools
where a great majority of poor Indian children learn. Proponents of such
populist pressures are usually consumer of higher education who in a
society where at least half of people do not have access to education
are, after all, already to some extent privileged. Some public spirited
IITians have also shown a great concern about the 'coaching culture'
which is too costly to be accessible to anyone. This makes government
funded IITs less accessible to majority of population. It is naive to
expect that this can go on and on in a democracy. Indian middle-class
parents are very sensitive about their children future and they see
education as the most important factor contributing towards it.
Governments worldwide are very sensitive to middle class demands for it
is the loudest section of populace. Under this constant pressure,
government may try to undermine merit for some popular demand as it has
done in the past e.g. in 60s, 70s and early 80s by expanding
universities without much thought of available resources. Given the
level of autonomy IITs enjoys, it can give short-shrift to some of the
government decision but not to all of them especially when funds it
receive is public money. In democracy, no matter how much desirable to
some, it is impossible not to be held accountable to public at all. We
also have to consider the idea of so called 'merit' while discussing
academic institutes. Merit invariably points toward a genius or a
potential genius. We often see a 'genius' as a gifted person, endowed by
nature her supreme gift - intelligence. Many, however, believe that
'practise makes a man perfect'. They argue that a person can be made
'genius' by giving him enough time to grow with a suitable training and
education. Confucius, a Chinese philosopher, was not convinced. He once
wrote, '***A donkey goes on traveling, it does not come back as
horse.'***implying that it is not necessary that a man can be changed
simply because his later education or training is improved. It is very
hard to change 'pattern of minds' of individuals, especially when one
has crossed the teen-age. Different patterns of mind are cultivated in
different environment and strengthened or weakened by the company one
keeps. It is worthy to note that what Adam Smith said in his book, 'The
wealth of nation' that "**.. the very different genius which appears to
distinguish men of different professions, when grown up to maturity, is
not upon many occasions so much the cause, as the effect of division of
labour. The difference between the most dissimilar characters, between a
philosopher and a common street porters, for example, seems to arise not
so much of nature, as from habit, custom, and education'.** Also
one**Prof. E. Leach** suggested that

> **If society insists that individual be segregated out into categories
> - first class, second class, third class, uper, middle, lower - the
> system will always have to waste an enormous amount of time and energy
> allocating individuals to the right slots and marking them with up
> proper labels.**

Though one sympathise with Prof Leach, its hard to see how a modern
institute can work with doing away such a labeling. However, in his
perspective, it stands out that inequality are an artifact of social
inequality. This is largely true in IITs where merit list correlates
well with the parents occupations and city of their residence. Its only
in the 20th century when these ideas of natural inequality, merit,
talent or ability were chased with a seriousness it deserves. It is
difficult not to be impressed by the inputs that have gone into
measuring intelligence in this century with US leading the way. It is
doubtful that any other human quality has been measured so extensively
and implicit in much of such labour is the belief that intelligence is a
gift of nature, perhaps her most supreme gifts.

> **Still, it is true that measured intelligence today is of higher
> significance than ever before .... In our society there is an
> increasing values placed on measured intelligence as the basis on
> which rewards will be allocated, in preference to other
> characteristics such as honesty, creativity, altruism, leadership, and
> dramatic, painting, dancing or gradening skills.**(O.G. Brim Jr.
> Glass, Neulinger etc al, *American Beliefs and Attitides about
> intelligence, Russel Sage Foundation, 1969, p3)*

Some have argued that anything valuable in this world is hardly
measurable. What makes intelligence particularity appropriate as a
quality by which individuals can be ranked? How one justify the belief
that intelligence as a whole can be measured? **Now we have come to a
point where experts know more about measuring intelligence than about
what intelligence is?**To put it in the words of Arthur Jenson
'***Intelligence, like electricity, is easier to measure than to
define."** (How much can we boost IQ and scholastic achievement?, A R
Jenson, p5)* ** That the merit or intelligence can not be defined thus
should not be measured will be a counsel of despair. One need not know
theory of intelligence to correct an examination paper. An institute can
compare its applicant by making them write an examination. True that
this will only evaluate a tiny portion of human intellect and that to a
limited extent but modern institutes are at peace with the idea that
they give training in a very narrow domain of specializations. The are
willing to prefer students who are highly skilled in a narrow domain
over those who are jack of all trades. It is a fact of industrialized
society where education is highly related with employment and employment
in such societies are divided on narrow set of skills. IITs can not, and
perhaps should not, prepare themselves to give an all-round education.
This will definitely end up compromising their core competence. This is
not to deny that a university usually benefit immensely by opening few
other departments at the periphery of its core areas of scholarship.
Competitive Institutes should have freedom to devise their own
examinations. A institute has to discriminate in one way or other when
it receives a large number of applications. It is unfair to ask IITs to
give admission to a student who is well versed in music but lacks
mathematics. However, IITs can select one if it finds that one's lack of
mathematics can be compensated by cultural or intellectual diversity a
musician might create. If the universities have confidence in their
abilities that they can remove inabilities in their students who got
admission due to policy of social inclusion then it would be good. It is
a well proven fact. North American universities have shown that a
university can easily do it and can reap its rewards later. The
experience with caste-based reservation shows that Indian universities
find themselves frustrated with this ever increasing demand of social
inclusion. This widespread frustration in our universities are mostly
due to lack of self-confidence in their own abilities toward fulfilling
these duties to a larger society. Universities can remove some of the
inabilities in their students, and they should try to do it. But it
would be a recipe for disaster if they were forced to admit anyone in
the name of social inclusion under the impression that university should
or ought to remove all of the deficiencies in their students. But this
does not seem to be the case with IITs any day where number of
applicants are so high and student selected are only a tiny fraction. --
Dilawar

###### Related articles {.zemanta-related-title style="font-size:1em;"}

-   [Government to go ahead with
    JEE](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/government-to-go-ahead-with-jee/article4120556.ece)
    (thehindu.com)
-   [Life on a campus : IIT
    Bombay](http://dilawarrajput.wordpress.com/2012/05/19/life-on-a-campus-iit-bombay/)
    (dilawarrajput.wordpress.com)

