~~~~ 
title: witnessing Y2K + 10....
type: post
status: publish
id: 39
category: Notes
~~~~

, This century started with the fears of Y2K problem about which in my
class, some guys - whoever had some familiarity with computer, including
myself - never got tired prophesying    about. "A great doom lie
ahead!", I'd declare. I was bit happy with the idea of witnessing
something so colossal. As the first morning appears in 2000, there was a
pleasing announcement in 'Samachar Prabhat' (Moring News) by All India
Radio that the problem somehow did not appear. I was bit amazed and
surprised. I did not like things happening this way. May be AIR got it
wrong with all the time difference around the world. I had to wait till
8:30pm till 'BBC Hindi Seva' announces that there was nothing happened
as predicted. What an start of this decade with a propaganda! The Lie
and most importantly people were believing it blindly and forgetting
about it just after few day. However some claimed that this problem will
emerge in Feb 29, 2000. I waited but no one on Radio took the trouble to
inform me on the same day.\
\
This decade had been a decade of naughties as far as Paul Krugman and
some  Guardian  "Free Comments" are considered. People occupied
themselves with all the financial collapse and all the shamelessness of
Wall Street guys but was not as occupied with Gaza and
Iraq/Afghanistan.\
\
Anyway, in my motherland few interesting happened in this decade. First
of all, I post-graduated with a degree about which I am quite numb.
Second, We have seen common people loosing their definitions. A common
Indian no longer lives in villages. It is now
english-speaking-upper-middle-class-brown-skin guy who has the habit of
'work by day' and 'party at night'. The real Indians are forgotten. Its
none of their fault since they do not form a part of market. But a good
thing happened in popular culture. [It was return of idealism and real
english-speaking-professional-upper-middle-class
guys](http://beta.thehindu.com/opinion/columns/Harsh_Mander/article80638.ece).
'Rocket Singh', "3-Idiots", "Delhi-6", "Paa" were the movies which
signifies this peculiar behavior in Bollywood. A real nice thing to be
happening around.\
\
In  past, we also had a lot more idealist movies than we have now.
'Rocket Singh' and 'Satyakam' are so same yet so different. In one,
where the life of staunch idealist protagonist turned sour and was
forced in destitute with his family, the philosophical factor is
prominent than real one. In 'Rocket Singh', its the corrupt guys who
bite the dust at last.  Which is more real. May be Satyakam is more real
but Rocket Singh is heartening.[Its like comparing Avatar with The
Road.](http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/cifamerica/2010/jan/11/mawkish-maybe-avatar-profound-important)
Satyakam is with values, Rocket Singh is with reality with fun-factor.
One is as depressing as other is hilarious.\
\
A kind of situation is between "Mother India" and "Slumdog Millionaire".
If you ask me, "Slumdog.. is a perverse movie." It may be real. It may
be successful. But it strip off the basic dignity from the people It so
piously claimed to speak for. On the other hand you never have a low
moment in "Mother India". Its a story, like a story of "A girl with
basket" on Allahabad platform who refuse to take money from the author
out of self respect. The story is of partition time. When author come to
visit India. The girl was selling basket. She wanted to sell them author
also who had his hands full since he has bought a lot of stuff. He put
some money on the palm of that girl out of sympathy who returned it back
with a smile. Few stories, whether real or imaginary, are life-shaping.\
\
Another thing which has changed in this decade is how people are
advertising. No longer Dipoka Ji extolling the virtue of a washing soap.
No longer a woman body is being used to sell a car. These days they are
selling lifestyle. They are selling ideas and philosophy. Abhishek, is
no longer selling "Idea" connections. He is selling the idea of using
more mobile. They are making fraternity. Some MNC are using Gandhi to
sell their pen. Ironical! Since He was the biggest supporter of
Swadeshi. Irfan Khan is no longer using security of insurance to sell
them, He is using fear and insecurity of life to sell them. Should We
consumer let it happen?
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-492451036307002131?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
