~~~~ 
title: these words are not suitable for world...
type: post
status: publish
id: 7
category: Notes
~~~~

Ever wonder why we are not advancing in the direction of fundamental
discoveries. Most of the basic concepts we are imbibing are well
established. Whatever i have studied till now, i dont think there is any
fundamental breakthrough made in this century. Yes we have done a lot in
technology but that is the application of thoughts/theories. And it
seems to be the these days that applications (technology) are
influencing the basic research.\
Personally, i feel before this century or rather before the advent of
printing press, world was obviously isolated and of course most of the
researchers was not in touch with each other. What they think, they
premises new theories on them. Most of the thoughts were of course
original and hence new to other thinkers. Their thinking was not
subjugated to what books told them. When they get published , they
influenced others and hence helped them improving and liberating their
ideas. Early childhood of those great thinkers must have been spent
without books. Books, here mean, a well defined literature published
over a significant area. I do not mean notes in any bounded form given
by they teacher, they must be called notes. I do not if i am right, just
a thought. Whatever they learned must have been carrying the impression
that that is not absolute. Now these days mostly and indirectly, these
books insist that whatever they are having blackened on them are
absolute. unfortunately most of the authors write their books in that
sense only that whatever is knew can not be replaced with alternatives.
The examination system is making these things worse by disseminating
these kind of thought among children. Do you really think the problem
they ask in exams can be solved only in the way they taught in the
class? i dont think so! this should not happen. How much foolish it may
seem, new approaches must be appreciated. I know i am not convincing
enough, but these 26 letters i dont find enough to explain everything. A
universal language should be constructed which deliver the same essence
of you, no matter written or spoken or whatever. If you have ever did
chat on internet, u must have felt it that a same sentence may have
totally different meaning in online and offline world. Emotions or
rather gestures must not facilitate the subject to decipher the meaning
of worlds being spoken, there must be a certainty of meaning
irrespective of other things. Well, i'll improve this blog later, thats
the idea just came in. I wrote it so i dont forget it. C u all later...
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-7306668386474176038?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
