~~~~ 
title: In praise of : Sachin Tendulkar
type: post
status: publish
id: 167
tag: indian cricket
tag: sachin tendulkar
category: About a person
category: In Praise Of
~~~~

> I am interested in greatness, not in damn dots.

-- John Arlott, writing on W. G. Grace

It is said that cricket chauvinism runs across two axes, those of nation
and generation. So when Steve Waugh came to the crease in the first test
of the 1998-9 Ashes, A fellow countryman Bill Lawry welcomed him on
television thus : 'Here is the best batsman in the world'. Waugh himself
quickly disavowed this title given by a fellow countryman. Earlier that
year, Waugh had fielded in Sharjah where 4 centuries was hit against
Australia by a rival, two scored in a test match played in India, two in
two ODI's played in Sarjah. At the end of it all he shook his head and
remarked, '*There is no one who bats like this guy - but I did not see
Don Bradman*.' Steve was judging Sachin Tendulkar. [1] National pride is
known to promote excess and cricket goes hand in hand with national
pride in India. So with a billion plus fans, Sachin Tendulkar is
conveniently labelled the greatest batsman by his
followers/lovers/fans/worshipers alike. For some of them even Bradman is
not great enough. According to 'damn dots', Sachin is the best batsman
produced by the city of Mumbai, and by extension, by India and perhaps
by this world too (whose fault is it if Bradman did not play enough
tests?). But if statistics are the measure of greatness then 'what you
will say about Jacques Kallis', asks Mukul Kesavan, 'who after 16 years
at the top has a Test batting average higher than Tendulkar's. He also
has 271 Test wickets to Tendulkar's 45, and 169 catches to Tendulkar's
110'? If I was a 'determined South African fan looking for numbers to
prove that my man was the best, I could legitimately argue that you
would need to merge Sachin Tendulkar with Zaheer Khan to come up with
Jacques Kallis' [2]. As commentators implies and his fans confidently
assert, 'is he greatest of all?' Can he find his way into World-11
against the 'monsters of Mars'? Indian batsmen, while excel at home, are
notoriously fragile overseas. On bouncy wickets, they will fall quicker
than you can spell 'coalition government'. During his career whenever
Sachin failed in those matches, he knew that his side would usually fail
too. The Mumbai columnist C. P. Surendran has written evocatively of
what Tendulkar meant to this nation of losers. In a country where a
single cricket-match could make national newspapers to declare that
'India has becomes a superpower', it should not be easy for him to walk
to the wicket for so much pressure to win. Whenever he went on to play,
'*a whole nation, tetters and all, marches with him to the battle arena.
A pauper people pleading for relief, remission from the life-long
anxiety of being Indian ... seeking a moment's liberation from their
India-bondage through the exhilarating grace of one accidental bat.*'Â 
What do you expect from a single cricketer who has so fully represented
the hopes of so many cricket-obsessed junkies? The greatness of his lies
in the fact that he had carried it all of these burden, calmly with an
unmatched temperament. If I were to judge, I would say that he may be a
great player but not the greatest of all. He is a remarkable player
nonetheless and there are many other who are equally remarkable. But
none of them had to answer to their one billion hero-worshippers and had
to carry the weight of their completely unfair expectation. Just imagine
afresh how would you react to a child who wails at night; or to an
examination paper which has to be answered 7 O'clock in next morning? He
is perhaps one of the greatest player. Quality of his cricket can be
judged from the fact that Englishmen, who are otherwise parsimonious in
praise of their opponent, have bent to Tendulkar. 'When Sachin batted at
Headingley in the Test match of 1990, Sir Leonard Hutton told Freddie
Trueman that he could not remember when he had seen such quick and sure
footwork'. According to Ramachandra Guha, this is 'the only known
occasion on which either of those Yorkshire-man is known to paid a
compliment to an Indian'. The next year he was contracted to Yorkshire.
A little brown boy had found his way into the hearts and cheque-books of
the most insular and tight-fisted community in the universe. [1] It is
rightly said that [longevity is the gold standard of
greatness](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/editorial/article3003779.ece)
and perhaps more so in India where a cricket fan is quick to worship and
quicker to demand player head. It must take a singular individual to
survive that long even with strokes of luck. So how about a place in
World-eleven against the 'monsters of Mars'. I would not bet on him in a
single match. But if series is going to last of few months then he
certainly going to show his class, at least by scoring centuries if not
by winning match for his side. Notes: [1] An anthropologists among the
Marxists and other essays, Ramachandra Guha. [2]
http://www.espncricinfo.com/magazine/content/story/543468.html --
Dilawar

![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-1377816676430465512?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
