~~~~ 
title: Love, Profession and Cast !!
type: post
status: publish
id: 19
category: Notes
~~~~

Do all of them have anything in common, think!! No.?\
\
There have been a lot of debate in media about reservations and all
other related things. I dont want to talk about what is good or bad for
others. The other topic 'love' has nothing to do with cast here in
particular, its the time we are living in gives a interesting relation
with them.\
\
Lets take love first, since most of the teenagers think about it a lot
in some way or other. I am not going to be philosophical here. We only
like to considers the aspects which we shows each other during romance.
(Interestingly people have this problem "she/he does not understands me.
I am different. She/He does not understand it. Dude! you are as good as
you behave. Inside you are as good as Ram/Sita, I dont give a damn. Its
your behaviors that I can understand not your intentions.) Anyway, the
economy is progressing, the reeks or professionalism is coming into our
personal life, the justification of meeting ends by any means is being
approved by the youth. Professionalism comes with a lot of problems.
After rapid industrialization, there was a need to make the workers
think in same way. Here in this white collar world, since we are good at
hijacking the language, we use professional instead of calling ourselves
laborer. It sound nice, media supports it. We write books about it
extolling its virtue. Its a conspiracy hatched by some eminent
businessman to make so called educated person "submissive". Give this
tag of 'professional' and force them to do what we like. Money comes a
adhesive and/or motivational factor. Most of the companies can not stand
individual creativity. The need to make all of them think for them needs
an appealing concepts. So they came up with "profession". It kills the
joys in life. We left love, ok! So do you want to be in a relationship?
No thanks! I am concentrating on my career. Fair enough! What about when
you are on the job? No thanks, I am concentrating on my career. Is that
too hard to keep the professional and personal life advancing together?
How come having a relationship can hamper your other part of life? Ok,
you did not have nice experience with the last relationship. it was all
foolish. So what to worry about it! it hurts! chuck it! hard though but
doing it not impossible. You dont want to get committed its early, you
dont want hanging around with someone without having a relationship
either. Homo sapience are amazing. No other species have that much
complication. Are we stuck in between having a casual relationship and
soulmate hunting? or The professionalism is extending itself over to our
emotional horizon too. No body would deny staying alone sucks! Even
darwin couldn't resist it!\
\
I dont want to comment about cast. So what is the relationship among
them. Really nothing!\
\
Consider this.. Love, profession and Cast are handling modernity really
well, its the modernity who does not have a freaking idea what to do
with them?\
\
Perhaps changes are coming really fast in out life. I am afraid that as
a society we are not ready for them. Rising intolerance around the world
is alarming!\
\
Hey, last point. Everyone who roams around in India wonders what keeping
it together with so much of diversity. A system is stable in nature when
either it is perfect or completly chaotic. Our diversity is so much and
it is very near to chaos. Even though We Indians hate each other, we can
not focus our hate-enegry on someone specific. We are blessed to be able
to hate 999 out of 1000 person we meet. So little time, so many to hate.
Oh man! give us a break.
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-6412331360938168070?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
