~~~~ 
title: know no-knowledge
type: post
status: publish
id: 8
category: Uncategorized
~~~~

The book "Submodular Network and Circuit Analysis" written by Prof. H.
Narayanan of Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, India have a thought
just before the 'preface' page. It says "Learning is a shore-less sea;
the learner's days are few; Prolonged study is beset with a thousand
ills; With clear discrimination learn what's meet for you; Like swan
that leaves the water, drinks the milk." Now just to emphasis "Learning
is a shoreless sea". True but disgusting! what was on the minds of this
human race who piles up so many knowledge on the heap already so much
vast to be embraced by the thoughts even by the most eligible person.
About 80 years of lifetime, so much to know. Why did we create such a
system which wants us to discriminate knowledges. I am of belief, as a
student along with the some philosophers the the most basic
understanding of the universe (which contain everything, some would say
Nature) should be developed which would take a reasonable time to imbibe
and that can facilitate furthur reasoning to answer out the questions.
Wasting time learning what has already been learnt is kind of absurd
thing to do. Though some would say that is how you can make yourself a
expert in a certain subject. This kind of assertion are really stupid.
Just ask a person who has devoted his/her whole life on a single
subject, what would be his/her response? For me it is still a open
question. I हवें't ask anybody. if u do plz let me know.\
\
What should be the aim of our knowledge? It is just not a philosophical
question. Assume i am a कhip designer, have a vast knowledge about
silicon chip. What is the significance, when hardly 0.001% people on the
earth uses these product. Once the technology saturates after reaching a
physical limit, this knowledge becomes useless. My point here is, i have
a knowledge which is rigid, has an application only in a specific area,
its useless. Anyone, even a machine can be programmed to do that job. I
want a knowledge which i can use at every going-ons of my life. Ofcouse
these days knowledge created by engineering, medicine, managements etc
helps you earn money and hence arguably better life. Just leave this
money thing out of the subject, now consider what would you like to
learn.You are asking me, i dont know! i am thinking. May be, some kind
of philosophy would give the answer.
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-2951233271172140662?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
