~~~~ 
title: Whither IIT?
type: post
status: publish
id: 130
tag: IITs
category: IIT Bombay
~~~~

Enjoying fame and keeping an independent mind is not something one can
expect from anyone. Fame is a double-edge sword. one feel tempted to do
whatever one's admirers want, and admirers are possessed with the one
being admired. It creates a loop with 'positive feedback'; and 'positive
feedback' is known do nasty thing to a system, especially to its
stability. It is far from my intention to build a 'system theory' for
these kind of social behavior. One probably will not go very far in this
direction for humans do not behave like mechanical 'components'.
Nonetheless, even though individuals are hard to predict, a collection
of individuals acting together under the influence of other humans (i.e.
group)  are relatively easy to predict. So as a group grows, it becomes
more and more 'predictable'. One can use 'system theory' ideas to study
social groups.\
\
Positive feedback can have severe effect on 'individuals' also. On my
mind, I have three examples. First is Salman Rushdie. It really hard to
believe he is the same guy who once wrote 'Midnights children';
Arundhati Roy is second. Had she not become famous and then attached
with the social-movements, we'd still have a remarkable fiction writer;
third and more recent is A. R. Rahman, I find it troubling that he has
become capable of producing the kind of 'stuff' for which he is being
awarded 'this and that'. Compare with him with that 'Roja' guy.\
\
One can have one priorities to act under the wishes of a certain group.
In fact, most of Indian chose their careers which are appreciated and
encouraged in their social circle. Gone are the days when parental
pressure used to make students choose their career though there are
movies made in this era which still love to point fingers at parents.
Since the consumer of this movie were suppose to be same students, it
could not tell them you are responsible for what you do. Its remarkable
how a movie titled 'three idiots' with so many double standards could
become so
famous[[2]](http://www.eledu.net/rrcusrn_data/India,%20Higher%20Education%20and%20Bollywood.pdf).
So if a lot of IIT graduate vie for banking job, its not because they
know that they want to do it, but it makes a nice story to tell their
friends, family etc.. Brands, whether of clothes or of companies, works
in the same way. When there is a high brand value[, there is a nice
story to
share](http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2010/dec/21/christmas-gift-aditya-chakrabortty).
I have seen people who just love to climb the mountains, prefer using
lifts to go to second floor of their hostels. Climbing stairs do not
create a 'story' to share in a group.\
\
If Rehman wants to please 'white ears' so let it be. Most of the
colonized minds of 'Browns' will like him anyway. Fall of an individual
is not as severe as fall of Institutes. A fame which came from
incompatible sources can ruin one. Among Institutes, IIT/IIM's are
famous for the reasons generally incompatible with what a university
should be known for. What this kind of fame can do to Institutes such as
IIT (I am not at all interested in IIMs, they have bigger problems to
solve!)?\
\
It is unsettling to note that how easily a semi-literate union minister
can lecture IIT (or any Indian university) on what they should do as an
university. Or a dim-wit newspaper like *Times of India* love to give
tutorials on how to run a university - mostly written by a
five-point-someone. It is more unsettling to note that no one from these
institutes can tell them fairly and squarely that its not his expertise
to tell universities how should they develop themselves or what should
they do. True, that telling truth to a typical Indian who also wield
some power can have severe effect on  individual but I don't think we
lack bold people very much. So why politicians and media (which is
worse) can get away with it?\
\
Since almost all of the universities are funded by government, one can
not be free from their influence. In fact this reason was enough for
Kapil Sibal to justify his incompetency on the matter. IIT's on the
other hand, though do few things to bring changes by themselves, feel
quite irritated about it. [They seek, as expected, to get financial
autonomy, mostly by increasing the
fees](http://www.iitbombay.org/news/Current/iit-faculty-strike-over-pay-and-autonomy).
So that they do not have to listen to government. IIM has already done
so and converted themselves into the schools for elites where no poor
person, no matter how talented, can dare to seek an admission. Even if
one does, with easy loans, he has to play into the hands of
industries/corporates to pay back. The guy is dead anyway. Love of the
FICCI and others towards IIMs can be understood. They know very well
 that everyone graduating from these institutes now will have to
privatize this intellect and soul to them -- there is no option
available to go to the rural hinder-land to serve. Raising fees, without
any concern for per capita Indian income, is really obscene. They should
know the students from villages also come to these institutes though
there are trying very hard to keep them at bay by introducing online
exams. How they are to compete on computer when they are used to pen and
paper?\
\
Money seems to be of secondary importance these days. What is puzzling
for us that IIT's are reputed for the reasons they really wish to avoid
these days, namely, talking about pay packages of their students. **In
fact, sometimes one wonders whether they do have anything else to talk
about to justify their 'bright mind'. **Though this helps newspapers
like Times of India to attract some eyeballs; we get a guilty
conscience. Nothing can be more crass to be known as a Institute whose
students can only prove their worth in terms or Rupees they are able to
fetch from the any sort of jobs for which they were not trained using
public resources. In fact, this point have been used against us again
and again. To make matter worse, media has been silent of our 'other
whiz kids' like Narendra Karmarkar, Debapratim Goswami, Madhu Sudan,
Manindra Agarwal, J Vasi, Deepak Pathak, H Narayana, Narayan Murthy etc.
And contrary to popular belief, you can not count these kind of genius
on fingers. Nonetheless, you can surely use your finger to count how
many of them are in India.\
[![](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2011/02/20110125529017011.jpg?w=211)](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2011/02/20110125529017011.jpg)
\
\
When a person stop appreciating his/her own work or an Institute looses
sight of its main purpose, it leads to severe depression in individual
and corrosion of an Institute. We also feel helpless in front of these
kind of attacks. Who would have thought the the biggest lover of
IIT's/IITian "Times of India" will create the 'public opinion' which is
now acting as a nail in their coffin. In fact, the most prominent
example of this helplessness was visible three years back when
government raised the seats in IIT's and IIT's could not defend
ourselves. On what ground IIT could defend themselves. Unlike Indian
Institute of Science (IISc), we are not known to produce Bose and Raman
(though we have done that); and if one take pride in producing 'skilled
workforce' rather than 'thought-full scholars', then one is the helpless
countering those who are in power and willing to fund for increased
capacity. Skills can be produced with money, and it can be taught to
incompetent students also. Using a CAD tool or writing codes do not need
any sort of genius. Its the generation of 'ideas' which
needs thoughtful people around you. IISc could defend itself. Indeed, it
does not release a second admission list even if only 10-15% chose to
join it from its first admission list. And She can get away with it!\
\
Increasing the size of an Institute without any concern for quality and
merit is not a good idea. What is the use of having 'research scholars'
who do not have the sense of what exactly 'research' is all about. Sure
at the time of joining, no one is expected to be 'know it all' but what
is pathetic that one is not able to appreciate the value of a theory or
an idea. One sails trough his doctorate program like it is a high-school
class, doing  the same this again and again.\
\
Talking of 'research community'. First of all it does not exists on IIT
campuses. There are certain groups though. The 'research scholar forum'
of IIT-B is going on the way B. Tech.groups usually go. Instead of
inviting people from academic world, they also invite lecturers
from business world. And all of them seem to agree that this indeed is a
great thing to do during their Ph.D.. Increasing the size of a community
does not translate into quality. In consequence, we do grow in size, but
'**could no longer conform to the original concept of a self-governing
community of scholars — they are neither self-governing nor do they have
a sense of community or scholarship**'.[1] It, at best, can only
benefits industries since skills they learn in technical institute like
IIT are exactly those they use. So without spending a penny from their
pocket, they get what they need at the cost of the university. A part of
it they spend glamorizing their acts. It may also help individual for
they also use this sort of IIT 'fame' to their own benefits. We also can
not stop students using IIT for their personal benefits. There is no use
producing a bunch of Ph.D.'s who are not suitable for employment inside
and outside an university. At best, universities can plan to retains its
best the brightest. By 'best' I do not mean champions of Times of India
or like newspapers. Academia must keep a safe distance from Industries,
no matter how distasteful it looks to middle class consumer. People
preferring IITB over IISc is due to same reason. Skills are not the
thing university should worry about, universities primary job to support
radical ideas.\
\
Indian universities in general and IIT in particular were shown
tremendous care by government. And they had been quite successful in
reciprocating this love. It really the public opinion which corroded and
corrupted them. What a mindless expansion in 70's did to Universities of
Delhi, Mumbai and others can do the same to IIT's now. Biggest threat to
IITs lie within, and as usual, only few seems to understand it. We do
have enough 'arguments' to justify our existence as a professional
Institutes, but as a university, we are only a good-university.\
\
I am not unduly depressed due to this lack of scholarship on IITB campus
because scholarships aren't on any campus anymore. Possibly a few
exceptions might exists like Princeton etc. As a citizen of India, I do
expect from my fellow citizen to show a appetite for building up native
Institutes even though their middle class instincts are better suited to
consume them till there is nothing left to extract. \
\
END NOTES :\
\
[1] University at crossroads, Andre Beteiile.\
[2]
http://www.eledu.net/rrcusrn\_data/India,%20Higher%20Education%20and%20Bollywood.pdf,
India, Higher Education and Bollywood, EPW\
\
--\
 Dilawar\
[\
](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2011/02/20110125529017011.jpg)[\
](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2011/02/20110125529017011.jpg)
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-3793672214827513759?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
