~~~~ 
title: AN OPEN LETTER TO RICHES/would be RICHES OF INDIA
type: post
status: publish
id: 26
category: Open Letter
~~~~

**TO WHOMSOEVER IT MAY CONCERN******Poor people are being exploited, you
said and laughed Democracy's last moments, you said and laughed Everyone
is corrupt here, you said and laughed All around is misery, you said and
laughed How safe you must feel, when I was wondering

You found me all alone, again You laughed.

[Ragubir
Sahay](http://www.kavitakosh.org/kk/index.php?title=%E0%A4%86%E0%A4%AA_%E0%A4%95%E0%A5%80_%E0%A4%B9%E0%A4%81%E0%A4%B8%E0%A5%80_/_%E0%A4%B0%E0%A4%98%E0%A5%81%E0%A4%B5%E0%A5%80%E0%A4%B0_%E0%A4%B8%E0%A4%B9%E0%A4%BE%E0%A4%AF)

I am son of a farmer. You may be aware of this creature. If you haven't
seen it, don't worry, you will see us more often! Some of us recently
came to Delhi, apparently - as one of your newspaper photographs told
you - to pee on Delhi's protected monuments, to take away the iron poles
as souvenirs and to create chaos in the city. If this single photographs
of one of us was enough to convince you that we really came to Delhi to
pee, then you know nothing about 90% of India. And about your Delhi
protected monuments, I can refer you to "The last Mughal" by W
.Darymple.

First of all they (your newspaper) refer to us as 'they'. Like we are
some sort of aliens living in country or the animals loitering around.
So please allow me fall in line. Hereafter, I'll call you, 'you' and not
a part of 'us'. Let me assure you that we really don't want to leave our
fields until unless your development agendas throw us out. And of course
We do not travel 200 Km just to pee. Neither we have this much of time
nor resources. We really work hard to fill your food stocks even though
we have to sleep hungry. The 227.32 million tons of grains are enough
for 1.13 billion people if and only if everyone consume maximum of 200
Kg a year without wasting anything. Since you process your food
(delightful pizzas et al.) and have enough purchasing power, the ghost
of Adam Smith will tell you that its the poor who will go bed hungry (If
(s)he own a bed, no pun intended.)! Yes, We farmers works so much for so
little, what an irrational behavior, Joseph Stiglitz might wonder; and a
Tim Friedman might convince you that we've had lost our mind. Why else
they are committing suicide? He successfully convinced all of you that
Keynes is a fairy tale. Ever wonder that It might be ethical since our
whole life, we only produce and consume nothing (Please don't argue that
we also eat and drink.)? Yes, your economy is progressing. But for us,
in short, from the time of Premchand to the time of P. Sainath, few
things have changed for good. One, of course is that 'you' rich people
do not vote even though your blood boils when someone across the border
have the guts to attack you. Your indifference towards democracy gives
us a larger say in government forming. Since politicians are not as
disconnected to the reality as they sound in Lok Sabha they promise us
Rs 1-3 per Kg rice if we bring them back to power, while conveniently
telling you about the great progress your economy is making. Ever
wonder? Thats the other story that Manmohanics is hell bent to cut the
farm incentives - or subsidies, a word developed to be used in a poor
guy case - in farm sector, possible to give corporates more incentives.
You know when tsunami struck, most of your largest hit countries (India,
Indonesia, Srilanks, thailand). Do you remember their stock market
performance (P. Sainath, Google Video, Globalising Inequalities,
pdfjustic) !! Everyone in dalal street was happy making money out of our
misery while some of us were fighting for our survival and wondering
what to do with all of those neck-ties and overcoats which were sent to
us as relief material. Yes, there was other useful material too but dont
you thinks that it is against the basic Indian dignity to wear the
someone else clothes. We find it hard to compromise on these kind of
issues of dignity. The will to survive with dignity is all which is left
with us. Your media keep telling us what a funking looser we are since
we do not own cars, our woman wears a lot of clothes, they do not watch
M.Tv, our children do not speak English and most of all, because we look
ugly. So most of us introduce ourselves apologetically like its a crime
to be a farmer. Anyway, thanks for your empathy, sympathy, mercy
whatever... Our public distribution system is in doldrum and who gives a
damn about rural health care. We now have (one of) the least effective
health care system. 30% of us do not visit a hospital in our life since
we can not afford it. Even in US, people cross border to get into Maxico
to buy cheaper drugs. And US used forces to curb this íllegal' practise
instead of providing cheap medicine.Anyway, let me keep myself
restricted to our issues. I understand that most of us do not look
beautiful- and its nothing less a crime in a land where every one want
to own the costliest fairness cream - and so the diseases which kill us
are not a big issue. Nevertheless, We can kill ourselves in large number
(The malaria/T.B. might be feeling inferiorly complex), some of us, are
not that timid so they start killing those who they deem responsible. We
conveniently call them Naxalites and send troops to 'hunt' them with all
the hollywood kind of name. Thanks to their slogan "fastest rising
DEMOCRACY", otherwise they would have used the army to 'hunt' them down.
You know a 'democracy' is not suppose to use army against its own
citizen ( We have to contrast ourselves with China too) so we use police
and CPRF which create more problem then they can solve. Or anyway, you
can force them to kill each other, remember Salwa Judam! While your home
minister, keeps repeating the same sentences which he probably had
learned when he was on the board of Vedanta Corporation devising plans
to loot the tribal lands. But the question is still left unanswered? Why
did we come to Delhi? I will help you get there. Just a help! You have
to see yourself what you eyes do not see that the real India is an
elephant in your kitchen (or bedroom). First of all we have to know that
injustice is being done to us, otherwise why We will move an inch from
our farms? Our only source of information, DD (And AIR also), shows us
that a lot of modernity is taking place in India and education is the
key to join the bandwagon. Given the reach of DD and given that it is
the only channel which tells us about what is happening around us, it
might have filled our head with poison that we should be part of this.
It made us believe that we are part of a decent society, the dreamland
of Nehru and Gandhi and we must be part of it else we are committing a
crime. So we send our children to schools, but it does not appeal to
elites. Now they must shrink their already shrinking space. Remember
some of them had the gall to go to high court in Mumbai asking them not
to permit the evicted slum-dwellers to vote after their houses were
demolished by Maharashtra government as they could be biased now. Ha!
Make a person homeless and then try to strip them out of their
nationality too. They put pressure on Prasar Bharti, especially the
corporate media and government, forcing DD to tell us few things about
us. Actually they say that DD is not making money! Prasar Bharti is a
burden! The quality is so bad! Its not making money because villagers
are not the market and DD cares/cared about them. Again quality is bad
because it does not show as many beautiful people as it should. It tells
the villagers about aids, RTI, NREGA etc. Its tell our children about
the world that most of them will never see. Yea, We know Walt Disney too
and we also enjoy it. Most of our women cannot/do not read newspaper out
of illiteracy or lack the time. Last thing they want to see a half naked
lady dancing in a obscene manner. Yes, we are dumb conservative, Shobha
De and her followers may like to comment on it!. Future generation may
find it pleasant,  by that time you would have made prostitution an art;
remember the novel 'Lolita", one generation banned it on the charges of
obscenity and the next rewarded it the Nobel prize. See the changes,
amazing.. one generation dirt could be next generation art! Yes, We
consider dancing half naked lady obscene! DD can be left alone as a
poor-guy TV, Please don't take away this from us. And please ask them
not to make money but to educate us. You guys anyway have a lot of
channels. You see we know much more about you than you know about us,
still you consider yourself better equipped to make decision about us.
We are not very sad with this. But one gets sad if he see darkness for
one's family, one's children. The idea of having eduction for our
children is probably the reason why we came to Delhi. You see, the cost
is rising. Simple supply and demand! (It make sense to you now, right?)
And our government can not do anything, though they are planning since
Nehru time. To educate our children we need money. So we expect more
though we have no control over it, or should I speak in educated man
language, "We want our crop prices to be adjusted to inflation". We
don't know that if we store our product for a while and put pressure on
supply side we can get much more money. Yes, We are that dumb. Rs 2 per
kg for sugarcane what the SUPPLY-DEMAND curve was insinuating for us. So
the government did not hesitate to bring the ordinance deny it (never
mind just 3 days before the winter season). Per 100 Kg of sugarcane you
can extract 10-13 kg of sugar. Most of you know. But it also gives
alcohol and raw material for paper from the leftovers. In sugar
extraction, even the chemical leftovers, which are rich in sulfur, are
sold back to farmers as fertilizers. There is no study weather they are
harmful and can cause innumerable diseases. And who will study them, our
agricultural universities are busy making Bt. Brinjal for us (to solve
food problem) while buying the genes from Monsato. Neither they asked us
if we want them to grow, and everyone else is happily endorsing them.
And yes, nobody is asking why they did not develop the genes in their
laboratory and why buy only from Monsato? You see, we still haven't
developed a single efficient instrument which can measure that NPK
content in soil, though everything comes from it. I tell you that in
India the most remarkable and marketable thing is its democracy.
Remarkable because only poor vote, and marketable, you all might have
seen the coverage! We vote so we wield some power. And we really really
appreciate that you do not! Ever wonder why an old lady who can not walk
properly goes miles just to vote for a person who she had never seen and
probably will never see? Or a shoe-polisher polish your shoes for free
when his choice of CM won? This is due to hope which India provides her
citizen and that why it survives. When hope dies, you see Naxals, they
put gun on your head and suddenly our PM start asking you to show 'care,
sensitivity' to tribals as they starts 'hunting' them. No wonder they
claim, "*White men called us Bhagat Singh, Brown men call us Naxalite,
Black men will call us rising star, inqlab inqlab zindabaad....*" Now
back to Delhi peeing-on-the-protected-monument thing. We were organized
by politicians who however could have done the same. But the government
was not worried, how much they can stand in front of brutal police
tactics. They will *lathi charge* them since we were taking law in our
hand, and TOI and HT will go gaga. But we took them by surprise. What a
large number! City police was surprised. Actually it was not the
politician who convinced us that we should go and pee on the protected
monuments to get what we is rightly ours, it is the growing discomfort
among masses. Over 80 millions of Indians lives below Rs 20 a day! Do
you think that Rs 100 per day for 100 days promise of NREGA is burden on
your hard-earned tax money. Please visit us for a day, We'll show you
what is hard-earned money. On human development what is the index of
your 'tiger economy'? How many child laborer do you have in your 'rising
superpower'? How many children drop out of primary schools in your
'knowledge economy"? It makes us laugh, if we can understand, how
cunningly you hides behind our back at climate summit, justifying your
stand citing our per capita emission, so you can continue same policies.
Mr. P. Sainath had been telling this all along. Sometimes some of you
guys surprised us by your common sense. We are not educated. Most of the
village banks do not provide education loan. See, leave the facilities
even loan is not provided. Government make sure that the quality of
their primary education should be that level that no body ask these
banks for education loan. They give agriculture loan, loan to buy
buffallo, loan to buy tractors, loan to buy seeds and pesticide from
Monsato etc. And the interest rate, now it is reasonable but there was a
time not in distant past when my father paid 24% on the tractor while
our well-off citizen were told through advertisement to buy cars only at
8%. Actually, we do not consider this a sin. Most of us consider it the
prerogative of riches. We appreciate your appetite because we all want
to be like you. What a shame! May be you'd like to cite Darwin and say,
"Its the survival of fittest". First of all it was not Darwin who said
it, it was an economist who coins this term. Even the brightest of your
students in so-called IITs/AIIMs (in anti reservation stand, which I
used to support) says that Darwin said that. Anyway, whoever said that,
it wouldn't change the meaning of this phrase. Sure, it a tempting
philosophy, may be next time we should rob some of you and and tell you,
"*No offense sir, Just the survival of the fittest.*" No wonder you will
be crying about societies and the responsibilities of a citizen. Ha! One
thing I'd like to state to all the citizen of this great republic about
which Arundhati Roy "listening to the grasshoppers". If you have any any
sort of influence which can effect our life, please visit us once is a
while before making a decision. If, after coming to our homes and seeing
us, you can not see what your eyes havn't seen and what your heart
haven't felt, please do not visit again. You may create bigger harm even
though your intentions are as pure as the water drink. And yes
of-course, you can pee anywhere in our home as you have been doing. You
can take away our lives a souvenir as you have been doing. And you can
create all the chaos in our life as you did in tribal areas. We would
not complain! And there is no use, your supreme courts sleeps more days
then it works. I have had bitter observations, although you guys talk
and write about us with a lot of empathy, at the same time you show a
profound hesitation for our company. Perhaps it is the hallmark of
Indian middle classes to have double standards. We just do not get it.
For us, the life has taken the same routine. But our peeing in Delhi did
not go fruitless. Lets praise our democracy! And take it from me, you
can tell your children if there is anything in this country to be felt
proud about, it is her poor citizen astonishing will to live (read
survive) with dignity and our democracy which is being presented to all
of us wrapped in a very dirty package by the media. And shame on all of
you, who dares to take away even that from us. Beware! We also know how
to bite. -- A farmer

###### Related articles {.zemanta-related-title style="font-size:1em;"}

-   [Sainath plans online 'People's archive of rural
    India'](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/bangalore/sainath-plans-online-peoples-archive-of-rural-india/article4305024.ece)
    (thehindu.com)
-   [Indian farmers trapped and
    desperate](http://realisticbird.wordpress.com/2013/01/27/indian-farmers-trapped-and-desperate/)
    (realisticbird.wordpress.com)
-   [Indian Farmers Trapped and Desperate by Graham
    Peebles](http://dandelionsalad.wordpress.com/2013/01/26/indian-farmers-trapped-and-desperate-by-graham-peebles/)
    (dandelionsalad.wordpress.com)
-   [12/4 - Slumdogs vs.
    Millionaires](http://sibd.wordpress.com/2012/12/03/124-slumdogs-vs-millionaires/)
    (sibd.wordpress.com)
-   [And then there was the
    market!](http://dilawars.wordpress.com/2012/12/08/and-then-there-was-a-the-market/)
    (dilawars.wordpress.com)

