~~~~ 
title: Matka (M. Tech @ IIT Bomaby)
type: post
status: publish
id: 54
tag: iit bombay
tag: Life at IIT Bombay
tag: M. Tech at IIT Bombay
tag: Matka
category: IIT Bombay
~~~~

[![](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2010/03/2010-07-04-2358481.jpg?w=300)](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2010/03/2010-07-04-2358481.jpg)
After passing through A, B, C, D kind of exams
([GATE](http://gate.iitm.ac.in/)2007), I applied at IISc ([Dept of
Instrumentation](http://isu.iisc.ernet.in/)),  IITM ([Dept of
Aerospace](http://www.ae.iitm.ac.in/%7Ekbhas/home.htm)) and IIT Kanpur
([Nuclear Technology](http://www.iitk.ac.in/net/)). Honestly, I am not a
supporter of competitions, even if I have been successful in one of
them. The discomfort is for various reasons, most prominent of them is
that competitions hardly add any social values. The boost in the
confidence which I  acquired came at the collective loss of confidence
of the failed ones. Collectively We stand to loose even when the
competitions are fair. And in India, competitions are not fair by most
of the standards. The more perverse thing about the competition is the
rise of objective kind of problems [Prof. H
Narayanan](http://www.ee.iitb.ac.in/%7Ehn/) calls them A, B, C, D Exams
and I liked the very sound of this notion. The worst thing, It only
allows one not to commit more than three mistakes and has the potential
to convert a regular idiot into [one of the three
idiots](http://beta.thehindu.com/opinion/columns/Harsh_Mander/article80638.ece) in
an extremely small time. In my case it took only 10-15 minutes. Before
the results were announced branding me as one of the 100 percentile, I
was like just other guys. It only shows that public is incapable of see
the talent by itself and someone has to figure out who is genius. But
such discrimination on the basis of merit is unavoidable, and
unfortunately, it seems, it is also very necessary. [Merit is
indispensable for a institute to function; merit and discrimination are
the faces of the same coin. Although every society has its own rules to
award the merit but you can not have merit unless you discriminate in
one sense or in
another.](http://www.flipkart.com/ideology-social-science-andre-beteille/0143062018-xow3f5xw3b)
Although, I'd ask whether I am perceived as a genius because I was
successful in GATE or I succeeded in GATE because I am a genius? This is
also true that in case of India this has not been a fair practice. For
last few years, the rise of upper middle class students in IIT is bit
troublesome. In fair competition, at least equality of opportunities
must be given. Those, who have the resources to spend time in Kota
concentrations camps and like centers already have an edge over those
are from the lower middle class or from villages. Even if they have the
money, it may not necessarily translates in to desired effects since the
access to information and resources may be limited. Well, as far as IITs
are concerned, they do not have any problem since coaching centers
improves skills of their future students. But any student who had an
disadvantaged beginning, has to be above average to do average. A
significant portion of students show tremendous decline in their
interests in studies and this should not be surprising since if they
were made to enroll in these programs under social pressure (the glamor,
parent pressures etc), it is bound to happen. Pressure, glamour or
awards alone can not sustain enthusiasm, they, however, can make people
to make choice they are not naturally inclined for. These unfair
competition effectively block IIT's from those who could have been
infinitely better suited for engineering in long term. But again, there
is hardly any method available to test candidates for their long term
interests. One is forced to used classical methods and hope for the
best. Now, we see a lot of students are getting away without doing much
of the work in their degree programs (and they still expect that grades
must be good else the professor is 'haramin') and 'copy-and-paste' kind
of the thesis is being accepted in Institutes, including in IIT Bombay.
When I say 'work in degree program' it does not mean to do what have
been told, [but the 'idea of scholarship' is being
respected](http://www.springerlink.com/content/k66372464k221972/). I was
slightly amazed to find out that some of my classmate (update, 2011:
most of them) went through coaching classes for GATE exams. Some even
took a year break to do preparation. Well what can I say, Indian middle
class have a lot of double standards. What they say, what they think and
what they do; hardly have any correlation. If granting reservation to
people is not valid, then spending time in coaching classes when most of
the other competitors do not have resources to do so is also unethical.
See End Note [1]. I took an Orkut survey which I sometimes appreciate
and sometimes regret (it has been my first case of disillusionment with
the social networking sites). Asking people which branch is better? The
question itself says that I had some sort of 'grading' about these
programs. Most replies came with the understanding that my 'grading' was
'good-job' oriented. Good jobs, invariably, mean 'good-money'. IIT
Bombay, [Microelectronics and
VLSI](http://www.ee.iitb.ac.in/%7Emicroel/) won over everyone followed
by [IISc Microlectronics](http://sindhu.ece.iisc.ernet.in/). I had
already applied in IISc, reapplying was not possible besides I want to
be a teacher so TA jobs in IIT would have been a plus. Three days were
left in the closing date of IITB applications process. I printed out the
form, filled it, took off my pics from my library card and pasted over
it; went to my department, HOD was missing, get his seal, signed it by
myself (I plead guilty); got a Demand Draft, posted it; bought a
water-melon in Rs 15; came home and ate it. I was skeptical about if the
post would read IITB in time since Sunday was one of the day in between.
Hopefully it did, and I got the admission. I was allotted hostel 9 with
a room-mate. It was slightly shocking to be put in a shared room at PG
level but what can one do when resources are scarce. Fortunately my room
mate turned out be a pretty nice friend. He later told me, when I saw
our name on the form I thought, '*Gaye ab to*.. :) and he was the first
person I met who bought a computer without headphone. He did not like
music, movies and games. I'd tell my Orkut friends that I forgot to
apply at IISc in microE. They could not doubt it, there was no reason.
I'd give them strangest of strange reason like Inter-IIT sports and blah
blah. Who would tell real thing to people besides I've learnt something
from a chicken in the movie '[chicken
run](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0120630/)' in which an American Chicken
had the habit - "I  tell people what they like to hear". One of my
friend, she would say , "*Tum Bombay ladkiyo ki baah se ja rahe ho
naa.*" (You are going to Bombay for girls) Too hard to argue with normal
people. Yes! I'd replied. It had been warned by one of my Orkut buddy
that time that IIT is reserved for her B. Tech. and M. Tech. does not
get that kind of treatment. In fact there are few blogs written by
Batkas to get a proper insight. [One is of course
this](http://oneamongstthecrowd.blogspot.com/2007/08/my-tryst-with-matkas.html).
On the campus, this is true that M. Techs (*Matka)* and B. Techs
(*Bhatka on IITD campus, Batkas on IITB campus)* do not mingle very
much. And it should not be taken as a disapproving thing. Neither there
is any necessity nor there is any thing wrong about it. But B.Tech's
generally consider M.Tech's hard working (at same time also inferior.
Why didn't they crack JEE otherwise?) as well as *give-up*, perhaps
because of their rough treatment when they discharge their TA jobs. Some
of the T.A.s seem to forget their U.G. days or perhaps they also suffer
from a common Indian disorder '*got-power-gotta-flaunt-it*'. Once, I
felt like punching my T.A. who was a Ph.D.. Dual Degrees (*Dudda)* and
Matka do a lot of courses and lab-work together and there is quite a
harmony among them. Initially there could be a friction, but it soothes
out later. This is not to say that they are being measured equally. In
fact at the time of our orientation, our Dept. HOD (Prof. Subhasis
Chaudhary) said that They (I dont know on whom behalf he was speaking)
are proud of their B. Techs students but they have seen some nice M.
Tech.'s also. Going through his profile would reveal that he got is UG
from IIT. [I do not believe in IQ's. I believe in enthusiasm and natural
inclination](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v458/n7235/full/458146b.html).
In India, or may be elsewhere, these common-wisdom has taken deep roots.
Otherwise how would you explain that a person who can not clear an exam
in first attempt can clear it in second or third with really impressive
score. Does that mean that a person is suddenly has become super
intelligent or does it mean that hard work always pays off? Rank only
shows that you are fast. Everyone can be a 'deep' but not everyone can
be fast enough. So in long run, to master a subject, it does not matter
whether you had some ranks or won some accolades, as long as you are
ready to hard work and give yourself enough time. If you are ready to
give yourself time and still want to become master of some subject, I
think you'll end up fighting and cursing shadows. People who are always
in hurry should try semi-literate but highly rewarding professions, such
as management or other like wise clerical works. There is very curious
pattern among the Matkas. Most of them do their UG in their home-town or
home-state. Living alone and keeping the interest alive in a boring
curriculum of engineering is tough if not impossible, and given the fact
that a lot of them are forced (socially or psychologically) to take up
engineering, it is not surprising. Unfortunately it is more acute in
students who are naturally creative for professional courses do not
encourage creativity; you just can't learn deeply when you have to solve
a problem in 3 hours. In undergraduate, it is very important that you
should not take a very puritan stand, namely, 'I'll not move on unless I
understand completely', save this attitude for Ph.D.. Better be safe and
have some achievements. So my observation is that we do not see very
creative people at PG level (Exception are there, as always!) and in
their UG, they are generally ripped off of their creativity, if any.
Being in home-town also make them very narrow-minded when it comes to
handling different cultures. They tends to react rather than respond,
have stronger moralistic arguments than of liberal/balanced arguments.
And not to mention doing M. Tech. in IIT means having a seal on your
documents to climb the ladder of success -- at most in markets, whether
of jobs or of marriage. A few professors - who generally lashes out on
UG's for their lack of enthusiasm in their courses - consider UG's
smarter than PG's. And this perception is largely true. Unfortunately,
IIT's still could not find a way to retain them. Any Institute which
prepares its student for markets will definitely suffer from
brain-drain. *(PS: In IITB, they have started dual degree program
(M.Tech and Ph.D) to retain their M.Tech.)*. Prof XYZ would tell his
(irritating) M. Tech. students, "*Don't do matka-pankti, first
understand and then argue.*" And he has a point. But there are others
who admire M.Tech. for their more hard-working nature in academic
courses as Swapnil have told me one day, "*One of my Prof, He said in
class that UG courses are disaster. I am not going to take them.*) So
there is a pattern of both kinds but in this pattern there is also a
pattern.  The *matka*-bashers are generally have their UG degree from
IIT's like XYZ, liberal one are from outside. Most of the Profs are
generally neutral. But all of them are of views that if UG stays here
for masters, and masters for PhD, the institute will flourish.  As to
say that UG's are the best, then PG's and then our PhD. Anyway, most
people come to IIT to get only one degree. U.G. are of-course
technically better. They have access to good professors and much better
teaching for four years. I was TA for a lab course, and most of UG I
came across became kind of friends. They'd reveal a more forthright
pattern. Let me make my stand so you cab be aware of my biases, I hardly
liked a typical Matka company and there was a time I avoided all of
them. They'd ask very narrowed and boring questions. As I told you, most
of them are first time loner and make group perhaps to kill the
loneliness and once there is grouping, individuality is gone. This is
not to say the UG's do not make groups. But grouping in UG's is somewhat
different because in UG, people are amenable to a very large extent.
[Group shapes an
Individual.](http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2010/apr/06/rats-humans-brain-food) 
Ask any Prof and he'd tell you that how hard it is to change a P.G.
student. That is why the true character of IIT's (or any other Institute
for that matter) can only be reflected by its UG's in general. Once one
of my Batka friend told me that a alumni came to hire and was lecturing
the UGs about few things and later He said, "Y*e pahle aane nahi dete
aur baad main sirf M. Techs bachte hai aur Matka kise chahiye..[pause,
after remembering that he is not a student anymore].. No offence, i hope
there is not matka here." (*They [IIT] do not allow us to come for
placement early and later we find only M. Techs and who wants a Matka...
[pause ..]...). One of our professors would reveal in class that, "*DD's
do not write M. Tech on their resume, they write senior graduate
student.*" Seeing his disapproval of MTechs I'd joke, "*He must have
caught his wife with a matka.*" By the way he is a good lecturer and his
classes are not boring. Curriculum of M.Tech is designed to fill the gap
which II-tier institutes creates in their UG's. That is necessary since
almost all of the Matkas are from other colleges. My dept has a
tradition of producing good quality research papers, usually published
in IEEE. Most of the papers produces are an effort of team, that
requires a labor oriented approach with machines which I hated and would
go to my Guide, Prof. DKS and say, "*Sir, I have compatibility issues
with staff. Its not to say they are wrong but I have issues.*" He would
give advice on how to deal with people and get your thing done, which I
hardly took and a complete freedom to do what I like which I never
missed. Its the Profs that make a institute great, its alumni is only a
bi-product of this process. Being on the IIT for two year was the best
thing that happened in my life till now. I was alone and have all the
time to think. Breaking away from friends is as rewarding for academic
life as maintaining a long list of friends is for professional life. And
after being in professional life for a year, it seemed to me that one
generally comes at the cost of another. In fact, few argues that
personal life also have its own conflict with professional life. It's
almost impossible to find a Matka, DD, Btech working on his own ideas
(and shamefully this might be true for some Ph.D.). At best they are
dictated by Professors. Ideas need free time to develop. Free time is
equivalent to the time you spend in privacy.[Privacy is very alien to
India](http://dilawarsays.blogspot.com/2011/05/privacy-secrecy-and-indians.html).
In childhood you can not stay alone else they will say that you have
some mental problem. At homes, there is no privacy. At college, this is
also not possible. In fact almost all the time you see a hostel room is
either occupied by two or more or empty. Only time you get students
alone is on exam time, and this is time to mug-up. I wonder when they
get the time to think things over and develop some their own ideas
rather than reacting to 'herd-instincts'. A widespread disease which has
plagued some of the best Institutes in India, most notably civil
services, is to glorify oneself at the cost of the Institute one suppose
to serve. In Civil Services, a civil servant can easily been seen
criticizing his/her Institute; almost every time to prove that (s)he is
a different pattern (Armed forces have been a pleasing exception). I
have seen that some of the students of almost every Institute are now
showing symptoms of this. They sometime claim that all the badness in
them is caused by the Institute but at the same time show very less or
no enthusiasm to improve the situation. This is not to say that these
people do not suffer. Indian, it seems, tends to great*ify* themselves
rather than building up an Institutes they are part of. For a nation,
greatness of an Individual is not as valuable as the greatness of an
Institute for individual greatness dies with oneself but an Institute
lives on to make few more great people. Had Nehru did the same, we could
never had the working Institutes as we have now. Now, it becomes our
(somewhat sacred) duty to make our Institutes better rather then using
them for personal gains. IITs are getting much crowd these days.
Intimacy is lost between Prof and their students. For UG's it is not a
very big concern since most of the things taught at this level are
generic but for Matka's and Ph.D. this could be a valuable loss. But
this does not make an issue among them, till the market is able to
consume them, All izzz Well...It is a reasonably good place to build a
scholarship, but learn to un-group in advance before making your mind to
join any institute. And if some of you can drop your utility point of
view about education at home, IITB will be very fortunate to have you
else it would be otherwise. Choice is yours. Hope to see you on the
campus. The pinnacle of competitions, IIT/IIM’s knows very well in
advance how many students will come from Delhi, how many from Kota, How
many from Bomaby… Sanil M. N., an alumnus of university of Hyderabad,
has information to share, “According to journalist S. Anand,
**‘ironically enough, some of the beneficiaries of reservation in
education were the Brahmins. In Madras Presidency College, the British
Administration noted that the most natives (only upper caste that time)
failed to clear the final examinations in second division (40% marks
that time). To ensure that more candidate passed, a third division (33%
marks) was introduced in the mid-nineteenth century.’ Now descendent of
these incompetent upper caste who benefitted from initial reservation
today celebrate the value of merit, while attempting to deprive Dalit
students of such reservations**.” In spirit He is not wrong. In letter
he could be, since reservation is not relaxation of marks. The
anti-reservation stand is very selfish. A state Tamilnadu has a long
history of giving reservation (69%, before Mandal II). One could have
expected that in Chennai, you will see same kind opposition what we saw
on AIIMS. It was the most mindless agitation I have ever seen. In
Tamilnadu, the difference between GEN and ST categories marks are now is
as low as 10%, in 2005. This difference has vanished between GEN and OBC
a long ago. It does not matter now. My advice is to upper caste dudes
and dudettes, “stop cribbing and start living!” PS : Please note that I
do not modify this blog any longer except for grammar and spelling
mistakes. Some of my views of have changed over time. Please consider it
as a reflection of a matka that time. -- **Dilawar  **

![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-1323543989404966584?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
Related articles

-   [Life on a campus : IIT
    Bombay](http://dilawarrajput.wordpress.com/2012/05/19/life-on-a-campus-iit-bombay/)
    (dilawarrajput.wordpress.com)
-   [Academic
    dishonesty](http://dilawarrajput.wordpress.com/2012/12/12/academic-dishonesty/)
    (dilawarrajput.wordpress.com)
-   [Concern with JEE, merit etc in
    IITs](http://dilawarrajput.wordpress.com/2012/06/26/concern-with-jee-merit-etc-in-iits/)
    (dilawarrajput.wordpress.com)

