~~~~ 
title: Society's perception of woman
type: post
status: publish
id: 182
tag: psychology of violence
tag: women in india
category: Gender
category: Indian Culture
category: Indian Society
~~~~

**(A shorter version of this blog was posted on a [google-group
samwad](https://groups.google.com/forum/?fromgroups=#!topic/samwadiitb/-Fr0IRMuTak).
There is some discussion on it.)**  That men do cruel things to women is
widely acknowledged and accepted. What is often concealed, not always in
innocence, is that woman cruelty towards woman is no less compared to
men's cruelty to women. This is not to condone any sort of violence to
anyone but to draw attention to a fact. It has been pointed out that
most of the female fetus abandoned or killed in India are due maternal
neglect. Moreover, those who persuade or force mother to abandon a girl
child; the doctor or the dai who does these operations are usually
woman. This is a weird but strong statement on women hostility towards
womanhood. This is also a classic case of [psychological defense
mechanism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Defence_mechanism "Defence mechanism")
in which the victim starts identifying with his or her aggressor and
turned against himself or herself. It needs attention to the ways in
which social institutes turn men and women against womanhood. And the
purpose of this post to scratch the surface of this issue.Feminists have
given a new dimensions to issues related to women. Feminists are of
great variety. There are many among them who are genuinely concerned
with their misfortunes, some of them are driven by sheer misandry and
they feel intoxicated by their own ideas when they find that these ideas
resonate among masses.  The early days of feminism was shaped by some of
the most remarkable women who fought for equal pay, better working
conditions and what not. 'I myself have never been able to find out
precisely what feminism is', the writer Rebecca West remarked rather
sardonically in 1913. 'I only know that people call me a feminist
whenever I express sentiments that differentiate me from a doormat or a
prostitute.'  [5] In India, feminist view has mostly been a human point
of view : the rights of women are human rights. That too must say
something about the problems of Indian women.To radical feminists, any
issue between a man and a woman is an issue between men and women. 'The
cruelty done to woman', they argue, that it is either done by men
directly or by design. Their work are useful for the purpose comparing
different point of view. There are more than enough evidences that men
play prominent role in constant tutelage of women but it would be
insincere to ignore that women do many self-derogatory thing to
themselves. In most of traditional patriarchal societies, woman are
believed to have fickle and aggressive sexual nature. The belief had
been, though the no one will speak implicitly in its favor, that they
will have intercourse with someone if given half a change. Their
mobility was restricted. This mindset makes itself visible on
televisions, most vividly in men's vest and perfumes ads. A few decades
ago, some concerns were raised about [objectification of
women](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sexual_objectification "Sexual objectification")
in media. One reason for this malaise was offered : media is controlled
by men. Now we have many females executive and presenters in media
houses and news rooms; can we say that objectification of women is
reduced in newspapers and magazines? The point is simple, women in
advantaged positions can collude with men, their so called oppressor,
and turn against themselves. Most of Indian women are of subservient
nature and they are known to accept their place in society without any
dissent. This is not to say they always accept their place by choice.
Some women have recently started criticizing these patriarchal designs
and have started breaking the traditional norms, including perhaps the
good one. The whole society seems to be hostile towards these women.
EPW, the keeper of nation's conscience, sums the situation up in one of
its editorial after the 'horrific sexual assault on a teenage girl on
the streets of Guwahati on 9 July'. The 'assault will not be forgotten
for a long time', it says,

> because of the nature of the crime, where the young woman was dragged
> away from the auto rickshaw which she was about to take and surrounded
> by a mob of more than 20 men who punched her, tore off her clothes,
> pulled her hair, groped her, burnt her with cigarette butts, called
> her a prostitute – everything short of a gang rape. Not only because
> of the shockingly slow response of the police located just one
> kilometre away. Not only because of the crass and callous indifference
> of dozens of citizens who drove past the girl as she ran down the
> street screaming for help. Not only because of the scandalous and
> unforgivable act of ­revealing the identity of the girl by the
> representative of the [National Commission for
> Women](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Commission_for_Women "National Commission for Women"),
> Alka Lamba. Or the equally mindless action of the Assam chief
> minister’s publicity department of sending to the media photographs of
> the girl with the chief minister.

\*\*\*\*

[Violence towards
women](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Violence_against_women "Violence against women")
is common in all societies; although male violence towards woman is
widely recorded by feminists in their respective societies. A
psychologist reports 'disturbing evidence' form U.S. from various
studies. 'One-quarter of American women will experience a completed rape
at some time in their lives, and nearly one half will be victims of
attempted or completed rape. Since the age of 14, 27.5% of college women
have experienced an attempted or completed rape.' Each year,
approximately '1.8 million American wives are beaten by their husbands
and one-eighth of all murders involve husbands killing their wives.' And
situation is India is likely to be severe because patriarchy is much
deeply rooted and incidence or rape or domestic violence are hugely
under-reported due to one social pressure or other.Studies by
anthropologists have concluded that men violence towards woman is a
universal feature of humanity. Although the prevalence of male violence
against women varies from place to place, 'cross-cultural surveys show
that societies in which men rarely attack or rape women are the
exception, not the norm'. It is said the 'male sexual jealousy is the
most common trigger for wife beating.' I think this is what Freud called
'penis envy' although ['The Little
Magazine'](http://www.littlemag.com/venusenvy/index.html)differs.Higher
gender-inequality encourage violence against the weaker gender. Where
women do not have access to property or income, she is more like to
suffer in silence, or more likely to use methods to survive which
undermines her dignity and self-esteem as a human being. Gender
inequality is not an easy thing to define or elaborate. There are
measurable inequality attached to it such as distribution of property,
illiteracy, access to food and nutrition, marriage age etc.; on the
other hand there are many immeasurable yet important inequalities such
as self-esteem, access to legal institutes, and dignity etc. At the most
basis level there is evolutionary tension : male tries to benefit by
mating with any female whereas female do not benefit mating with every
male comes her way. This tension is becomes very severe in those
primates where male do not provide any parental care. Among mammals, a
gender which invest heavily in its offspring tends to be more choosy.
Usually females invest more and therefore they are more choosy. Males
either compete for them or mate with them forcibly. For a detailed
commentary on 'male aggression towards women' among primates can be
found in [1]. Many social arrangements must have been constructed in
response to this evolutionary tension. ** **

**\*\*\*\***

Gregory Zilboorg famous paper suggests something similar. Male
oppression of women emanates from his attempts to deny his deepest
anxiety. 'The most socially valued attribute of the male', Zilborg
argues, is a 'result of natural selection imposed upon him by the
female's original power; which is to sense which male is biologically
fitter for her offspring'. According to Steven Pinker, human females
prefer 'dark and dashing heroes' (for better genes for their offspring)
for short term affairs while 'caring and nurturing one' (for better
resources and nourishment for their offspring) for long term relation.
It is likely that caring and nurturing 'dad' who is no less prone to
fall in love with a woman, develops a feeling of hate towards women when
he faces rejection for a dark and dashing 'clad'. How a woman evaluates
such attributes in a male is altogether different matter. In society
like us, women often prefer males who can provide better security and
status in her society. Those who rely heavily on self-assessment, may
pick someone with high IQ or EQ or other skills which they value, even
though they are not high in status or profitable in markets. Women
dominate in mate-selection process and this supremacy of women arouse a
feeling of jealousy and hostility towards women [3]. In certain western
countries where males were reduced to a very small number due to world
war, women have to learn to compete for better men. In India, however,
situation has always been different. It is the male who is in excess and
it is the male who often tries to woo a better (read beautiful) woman.
Indians women usually don't like to take the first step for the fear of
considered 'immoral' or 'cheaply available'. Girls who are beautiful and
attractive often attracts a great deal of unwanted attention and
jealously which is best noticed in the comments passed by a group of
boys when they see a girl with some other boy :  such as 'aajkal is
laudiye' (Girls these days ....'). What stands out in this often passed
comment is that they insinuate something about whole gender after seeing
a girl which does not fit to their image of proper girl.

\*\*\*\*

Most of our intellectuals, whether Left wing or Right wing, agree on one
thing while discussing why Indian cities, and perhaps even villages,
have become insecure for our women : it is an outcome of modernity.
Modernity may have consolidated hatred and angers towards [some type of]
women; it has not created those feelings. Modernity is a new phenomenon
in India. And when an old system is being changed by a new one, it is
not going to be a painless process. We are an agriculture society and an
agriculture society have a love-hate relationship with nature and such
societies tends to emphasize 'feminine principle in nature, to see
nature as mother who is irascible and unpredictable, pro-pitiable only
through a variety of rites and rituals' [2]. In our past, nature played
a dominant part in the man-nature dyad and continues to do so;
'important themes in folklore and religious text are often speak of the
fecundity and bounty of nature as well as her frequent denial of
sustenance to men who have poor means of controlling the fickle mother
and are totally dependent upon her for survival.' Thus woman dominated
symbolically in ancient India although this dominance was limited by
Brahminic tradition by limiting her role in the social functioning and
controlling her sexual liberty (or laxity depending on the point of
view). This point can be seen clearly when one notices the matrifocal
culture where femininity is linked with 'prakriti', or nature, and
prakriti with leela, or activity. Similarly the concept of 'adya
shakti', primal or original power, is entirely feminine in India. [2]
Some of the cruelest custom existed in India such as Sati, child
sacrifice at Sagra Sangam, infanticide to ensure longevity of dams and
buildings were all centered on some goddess. Some of most marginal
groups in ancient India sought meaning as social being by being devotee
of one 'Black' goddess or another, that is, speaking metaphorically, 'by
identifying and being identified with an aggressive, treacherous,
annihilating mother. In other words, as Ashis Nandy puts it, 'the
ultimate authority in Indian male has always been feminine' [2]. Studies
of child rearing in orthodox Indian families reveals that a woman
(usually mother) has free emotional attachment to her [male] child. On
one hand, child is dependent on her mother to an unusual degree and
second and to others Indian child has distance relationship which is
fragmentary and context based. Even the father acts as as outsider, who
rarely come into the picture even to punish or reward the child. 'It is
only with respect to his mother that Indian child is his whole self and
recognizable as an individual.' The child sees his father more as a son
of another woman than a husband of his mother. For the Indian mother, on
the other hand, the son is major medium of self-expression. Her status
in society is fixed by the status of her husband but her status in her
house depends on the status of her sons. It is motherhood that
traditional Indian family respects; her role as a wife is devalued and
debased. Thus a woman self-respect in India family depends heavily on
the status of her sons and for that matter she invests in them heavily.
It is through his sons, she exercise her authority and defends her
influence on her sons by all means possible. In traditional joint
families, it is still a major source of tension between his newly
wed-bride and his mother : a wife tries to claim her husband at the cost
of a mothers' claim over her son. Associated with this in the son is a
deep feeling of ambivalence towards her mother who is both controlling
and discontinuous. The son tries to revolt yet he is helpless. He often
sees her as a treacherous betrayer for not letting him out of her grip;
controlling him by her always present nurture. One of our psychologists
has noted that the India's fantasy life is to a great extent organized
around the image of an angry, in-corporative, fickle mother, against
whom his anger is directed and from whom through a process of
projection, counter aggression is feared [5]. This ambivalence towards
mother takes a form of ambivalence towards womanhood. In passing, it is
worth noting that all major social reformists targeted the traditional
concepts of woman and womanhood. On the other hand, the idea of mother
was always invoked against the modern Western encroachments on Indian
society ; and it is still invoked against cultural corruption. And so
the woman as a symbol e.g. motherland, mother-tongue, are greatly
praised in our society. It all may inculcates in a woman serious
self-doubt. She starts undervaluing herself. She has to carry this added
burden of 'greatness' which may not be at all compatible with her human
nature. Majority of women, who never had access to 'modern or western
thoughts' which advocate equality of gender, can be made to feel guilty
whenever she tries to break the traditional norms of 'womanhood' by
asserting her real self. This has changed in cities, although not to an
extent to which many feminists wish. In cities, and even in towns, young
women are coming out in open against such unwarranted demand of being
devi or flag-bearers of their culture. This is a major source of
irritation and anger of orthodox section of our society.

\*\*\*\*

The ambivalence towards woman in Western male is slightly different from
that of Indian male. Western male fears the universal fear with Zilboorg
speaks in his paper. In India society, leaving some strong martial
cultures of Ganges plane, the man's fear is not that he will lapse in
womanliness and thus loose is masculinity or potency. Indian males don't
strive for potency as such. Unlike west, it is his ability to abstain
from sex rather than hedonist display of sexual desires which is
considered sign of sexual potency. The discomfort with and criticism of
Nehru and Lady Mountbatten affair make one feels that great man are not
suppose to get an erection in India. The masculinity fear here is that a
man may fall foul of the cosmic feminine principle, that woman will
betray, aggress, pollute, or at least fail to protect. The demand of
motherly protection of man by his wife is best displayed in the story of
Savitri where she saves her husband from death itself. Woman who failed
to protect her husband from death were severely punished as widows,
sometimes even burned as Sati. Now one can find an explanation why there
is a common word 'randi' or 'rand'  used in Hindustani to describe both
prostitutes and widows. There is a great deal of abhorrence for both :
one pollutes their culture while other fails to protect. Although on our
campuses this word heavily used by young boys and girls is more close to
its English slang 'bitch'. Indian males are most likely to see a woman
as women; a collective symbol and not an individual entity. There is an
image of 'ideal or proper woman' in his mind. When he sees a woman
different from this image, he is more prone to criticize the whole
gender, and speak of its debasement. And in turn, more likely to demand
a punishment, if he is caught in moral outrage. Even he is not into
'moral policing', he starts maintaining a safe psychological distance,
and he tolerates other men cruelty towards women. I have sympathy for
Indian male in general for it is not entirely his fault for letting
women take part of his mind and identity. Indian fathers do not play a
significant part in emotional development of the child; and her mother
-- whom the child also sees as a woman -- is given a free emotional ride
over him. Deep emotional attachments (as well as partial identities) are
known to extract heavy price from those who live with them. No doubt
that Indian woman have paid terribly and continue to pay for Indian male
insensitivities, but they have also extracted a heavy toll from society
by permanently residing in its psyche. Indian man has yet not learned to
live with all aspect of womanhood which have always been much more
different from the 'ideal image' of it in his head. And Indian women are
confused if traditional roles assigned to them are good or bad; or
incompatible with their modern aspirations. Violence is a doubly edge
sword. Those who tortured and killed people in wars also do violence to
their families[and
themselves](http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/feb/01/us-military-suicide-epidemic-veteran).
A country which invades other countries also suffer from shooting spree
at home. A fact which Gandhi understood very well. 'Modern psychology
consolidates such belief', argues Nandy, that 'no marauder can hope to
be a marauder without being a prey and no prey can not be a prey without
being a marauder'. END NOTES : [1] Male aggression against women, An
evolutionary perspective; Barbara Smuts. [2] For an analysis of woman's
identification with the aggressive male and her hostility towards
womanhood see Karl Menninger, 'Love against Hate'. And 'Woman vs
Womanliness in India', Ashis Nandy. [3] Gregory also claims that male is
a 'parasitic' fertilizer. I find it hard to believe. Human male also
invest in his offspring. He is much more than a parasitic fertilizer.
Human male is also choosy, perhaps more so in modern times than they
were older times. [4] See 'Sati – a Nineteenth century tale of women,
violence and protest.', Ashis Nandy [5] See Leela Dubey, 'On the
construction of gender : Hindu girls in patrilineal India' where she
explores 'the mechanisms through which women acquire the cultural ideas
and values which-shape their images of themselves and inform the visions
they have of the future.' She comments on 'the processes by which women
are produced as gendered subjects in the patrilineal, patrivirilocal
milieu of Indian society.' This article also examines the process of
'socialisation of Hindu girls through rituals and ceremonies, the use of
language, and practices within and in relation to the family.'. EPW,
April 30, 1988. [6][Indian male psyche, society and
sexuality](http://india-seminar.com/semframe.html "http://india-seminar.com/2013/642/642_comment.htm"),
Seminar. -- Dilawar ( This article is most likely to incorporate changes
and additional footnotes over time).

###### Related articles {.zemanta-related-title style="font-size:1em;"}

-   [Rape, shame and the curse of
    patriarchy](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/open-page/rape-shame-and-the-curse-of-patriarchy/article4323558.ece)
    (thehindu.com)
-   [Rapes and
    wrath](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/columns/Vijay_Nagaswami/rapes-and-wrath/article4269072.ece)
    (thehindu.com)
-   [We must all counter the mood music of rape
    culture](http://r.zemanta.com/?u=http%3A//www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2013/jan/07/rape-culture-libby-brooks&a=136326088&rid=00000279-6b96-000F-0000-0000000000b6&e=f80899d0a950a7ed589239c0bb87e1cb)
    (guardian.co.uk)

