~~~~ 
title: Intellectual commitments 
type: post
status: publish
id: 1208
tag: Academic culture
tag: Irawati Karve
tag: Nirmal Kumar Bose
category: Academics
category: Indian Culture
~~~~

> ‘I will pay my debt to society through research in my subject. And
> beyond this, I owe no other debt to society.’ Having resolved this,
> she went on.
>
> —Vidyadhar Pundalik (1970) on [Irawati
> Karve](http://nandinisundar.blogspot.in/2007/12/in-cause-of-anthropology-life-and-work.html)

My first rigorous encounter with city-schooled boys and girls happened
during my under-graduation. It gave me some clues about our intellectual
culture, for most if not all of our intellectuals come from this
background. I marveled at their artful ways in which many among them
described their interests in, if not a love for, sciences. Many were
interested in physics and mathematics and a few in chemistry. They spoke
about their time in coaching centers and how much they loved a
particular topic. They also talked about their heroes; two names which I
still remember are Feynman and Irodov. I did not read them in school,
for they were not available in my Hindi-medium school (they were in
English anyway). I often felt left-out and at times I constructed my own
imaginary love affairs with physics and mathematics in order to cope
with the peer pressure. It troubled me that I could not feel a very
strong inspiration as they felt for any subject. How were I to compete
and flourish among them! Over the time two things became apparent: one
was personal that I do not flourish in competitive environment; and the
second was about my social environment, that almost all of them whom I
thought to be inspired were only stimulated. Their interests would
change according to change in stimulus: the movie they watched,
biography or magazine they read. In the end, they burned-out easily and
accepted whatever life threw at them. The modern man does not complain
about his karma, he devise subterfuge around it. So they developed
artful ways for justifying what they were doing. They picked
philosophies -- and at time psychology -- to justify why they were not
honoring their ideals; most frequently drawn analogy was them being a
man who was forced to swim with the flow. It was odd: if no one
appreciated what they cherished, no one really stopped them pursuing it
either. By the end of final year, they were spending almost all of their
time discussing companies, jobs, and admission processes abroad with the
same if not more concentration with which they discussed physics and
mathematics when they were in first year. I was somewhat surprised to
notice that even those who should have been more confident about their
self-worth suffered from the same paranoia about getting a job or
admissions as those who had some real reason to feel that way. But that
was one of the worst college one could spend his academic time; teaching
of very bad quality happened if it happened at all. But the lack of
academic rigor turned out to be good for me for I got a lot of time to
compensate that gap I accumulated in my school. I came to appreciate it
only when I came to discover what many poorly-trained reserved category
student go through in IITs. When I joined my engineering program, I was
no better than many of them. I knew in my bones that raw talent is not
enough, one needs skills and one needs a lot of time to polish them. But
only in a “bad college” I could get plenty of time to recover. Without
passing any judgement, all I wish to point out that if my college did
not teach me well, it did not strike blows to my self-esteem either, as
IITs can easily do to many of its students should they are unfortunate
enough to go through a lean academic patch. Now I suffer from another
problem. It is not a personal problem which cropped up from within but
it is constructed by my social environment and I am being made to cope
with it. Am I committed to a social cause of great urgency? And if I am
not, does it make me worthless to my society? Is my commitment to my
academic work (even if I don't love it too much), or to my academic
project, or to my profession is not enough. Do I need to do something
more to justify my existence? The late anthropologist Nirmal Kumar Bose
used to say about his generation of Indians that deep down in their
heart they believed that no change can occur in their society without a
government initiative. And this belief still around among us in plenty.
It was in this belief, radical, ex-radical, and near-radical
intellectual put their shoulder to the wheel in the hope to make the
state somewhat more radical, in hope of making this world a better
place. Anyone whom they saw “sitting on the fence” and coldly watching
the world go by was treated with criticism if not with indignation.
Being uncommitted to any social or political cause, in their view, was
equal to being ineffectual and impotent. Now either the “ivory tower”
intellectual really existed in the past, of it was constructed by these
intellectuals to justify their new commitments and pour scorns at those
who did not committed to their cherished commitments. It is my belief
that in a decent society everyone should be allowed to chose a role for
himself according to his own will. I appreciate that people commit to an
urgent social problems and act in good faith towards some higher
purpose. These are signs that our society, or at least a part of it, is
potent and vigorous. But not everyone has to be a champion of social
change and political action; some can settle for a less spectacular life
for themselves. There must be a place in all societies where a handful
of people can make "pursuit of ideas" their cherished goal in life
without worrying too much about social worth of their work. If the
university can not accommodate such people and keep throwing cold water
on their work by demanding that it has to be “socially relevant” then
there is very little to look forward to in an academic life. The
obsession with “here and now” hurts all aspect of social life but
nothing more seriously than its intellectual life. It is a pity that
like our social activists our intellectuals are too slowly forgetting
the importance of reaping the reward of their labor posthumously.
\*\*\*\* If people in modern world are obsessed with ideologies --with
their own and of others -- they are no less obsessed with “change”. It
is in the nature of radical intellectuals to believe that nothing can
change in this world without subscribing to a universe of values of some
ideology. Perhaps they also believe that all changes happen for good.
Those who are dissatisfied with government power are now “empowering”
people who happened to be on their side. No matter how they glamorize
it, this is an exercise to accumulate enough power on their side to push
their ideas. It will make our democracy more populist that it already
is. It may not turn to be to liking of those who believe that empowering
people is all it takes to change their society into their utopia. A
major philosophical work of last century promotes in plain words the
need to “change the world” over “interpreting it”. Many if not all in
academia seems to be inspired with it, and their numbers are increasing.
No matter how much inspiration others draw from this work; if an
intellectual is able to convince himself that the world can not be
changed through the pursuit of idea alone, no matter how slowly, then he
ceased to be true to his vocation. Those who claims that mere pursuit of
ideas is not enough and one should commit to a something more than that
are just one step short of demanding that one should be committed to a
political party, a religious body or a social organization to justify
his place in society, or at least to be more effective. This is a view
which undermine individual, his intellectual independence, and promotes,
implicitly or explicitly, group of people, herd or mob. For those who
are concerned with ideologies and "change", pursuit of power has much
more appeal than mere pursuit of ideas for if a realm of idea has to do
something here and now it has to be connected with realm of power. But
those who take pursuit of ideas seriously must ask themselves how long
and at what and whose cost these two can go hand in hand? The demand of
intellectual and social commitments are not one and the same and this
should be clear to all intellectuals who ask others to join their
causes. Commitment can mean different thing to different people and one
often singles out a particular commitments for ones special attention.
He often feel a need to glamorize his commitment for the purpose of
selling it to others, especially when his own faith in it is lacking.
The commitment of a student to his homework, of an engineer to his
project, of an mathematician to his theorems, of a doctor to his
hospital, of a writer to his writings, of a teacher to his classroom and
students, of a judge to his court, of an artist to his craft are no less
demanding than that of our “committed” intellectuals. These commitments
may not be appreciated by a nationalist, a revivalist, a
traditionalists, or a Marxist; for them the most important commitment is
the commitment to nation, religion, tradition, and to political partly
respectively and they denounce any other commitment which seem to weaken
their most cherished commitment. For them commitments are not a set of
plural things but hierarchical with a well defined ranking.
Intellectuals and universities have a natural relation with each other,
although intellectuals in India (unlike France and Germany, and even
USA) rarely works on universities. We are well aware of a young
academics who starts his academic career in Indian university with great
promise but in the middle finds himself either building empire for
himself and for his dependents, or start participating in urgent social
and political causes. Who among us has not felt the urge to do something
more to make this world a better place? Many intellectuals fight these
urges. Watching Mr. Yogendra Yadav with Aam Aadmi Party, one gets the
feeling that the urge to “do something more” runs quite deep even in
calmest of our academic backwater. Perhaps there is something else,
other than the desire to change the world, which attracts people to
these commitments. The respect and high esteem our society grants to
man-who-can-do-things creates some paradoxes on our universities.
Entrepreneurship skills tends to be highly valued over academic skill on
our campuses, and those who posses them are seen with both envy and
admiration. This is not limited to student communities. The Indian
professor loves to talk about his commitment to teaching and research
but he also love to accumulate administrative tasks (usually in
committees and outside government) to improve his social status in the
eyes of society or peers. There is hardly any university in this country
where a professor pulls more weight than the registrar and there are
some where a registrar pulls more weight than vice-chancellor. This all
culminates into an unfortunate phenomenon: academics in India do not end
as academics and when they do so they are seen as failures. Though I
have witnessed some rare exceptions to this rule. The life of an
intellectual pursuit, in many ways, is an arid life. An extremely
talented person might create lot of good work but a very little of it
survives; and most of it fall by the wayside. In this respect, an
intellectual life is also a very risky endeavor. It is not surprising
that only a few among us can make peace with this social fact and others
feels a strong desire to do something more to prove their worth. Perhaps
a few among us can leave their work to be judged by posterity; for rest
of us the choice is already made and it is a choice between
self-assessment (i.e. the assessment by peers) or assessment by an
outside agency usually a government agency (in terms of grants and
awards) or the media if not the society (in terms of attention). The
moral of story is simple: that a man, no matter how talented or
versatile, may not be capable of maintaining more than one commitment.
The trouble with our intellectuals (as it was with my classmates) is not
that they are not committed but that they are committed to too many
things without being serious about any. Those who have already committed
to some intellectual pursuit or thinking of doing so would do well to
remember what some of our predecessors knew very well. That the goddess
of learning is a very jealous goddess, she is not pleased by hymns of
praise and material offerings but demands a life long unwavering
dedication. -- Dilawar

###### Related articles {.zemanta-related-title style="font-size:1em;"}

-   [Where have all the public thinkers gone? Away from
    universities](http://www.theglobeandmail.com/commentary/where-have-all-the-public-thinkers-gone-away-from-universities/article14958029/?cmpid=rss1)
    (theglobeandmail.com)
-   [Freedom and Intellectual
    Creations](http://hannateves.wordpress.com/2013/10/18/freedom-and-intellectual-creations/)
    (hannateves.wordpress.com)

