~~~~ 
title: In praise of : Secularism 
type: post
status: publish
id: 530
tag: Attack on secularism
tag: In praise of
tag: Secularism
category: In Praise Of
category: Indian Society
~~~~

A growing tendency in India is to attack secularism, covertly and
indirectly. The attack on secularism is somewhat similar to the attack
on equality. They maintain since we can not define secularism (like
equality) in a strict sense, it will be good if we stop using the term
altogether, at least to avoid the intellectual confusion. More
adventurous among them will go on to say that it does not exists at all
and everything which is called secular is a form of pseudo-secular. In
addition, they may also argue that many people those who speak in the
name of the secularism are not strictly secular. Similarly, as one would
say against equality, all those who speaks in the name of equality do
not practice equality. Indeed, one can easily show that many of them
practice in private just opposite of what they preach in public. But can
we take these inconsistencies in the practices of these secularists
against the idea of secularism itself? It yes, then it is easy to show
that those who maintain that religion is a good thing often use it to
achieve some other ends. Then, it is pseudo-religion which exists and
therefore we must stop using the term altogether? We can drive a term to
a logical nihilism but it will be a counsel of despair. Besides a
meaning has to be given to secularism, even if it does not exists in
strict sense for it has made its way into our constitution. When we look
at various concrete definitions of secularism then one can raise many
serious doubts about it. In an engaging book, Amartya Sen has listed out
six major criticism of secularism. They are :

1.  The Non-existent critique, 2. The 'Favouritism' critique, 3. The
    'Prior Identity' critique, 4. The 'Muslim Sectarianism' critique, 5.
    The 'Anti-Modernist' critique, 6. The 'Cultural' Critique

And he goes on to defend secularism. Amartya Sen's ability to make
distinctions is amazing and he moves from one distinction to another at
the breathtaking speed. I can not possibly give an overview of all of
these distinctions in this post. I'd suggest that you read the essay
'Secularism and its discontents' [in the book The argumentative Indian]
by yourself. What I wish to do in this post, however, is to give a
sociological perspective to the idea of secularism. If secularism is an
ideology then like all ideologies it must stand for something. And those
who stands for something have to stand against something else.
Ideologies try to change the word and to change the world, they must
pursue power. Therefore if secularism is an ideology, then it must take
away the power from something and give it to itself. Is it religion? 
The common definitions of secularism are dependent on religion and it
generates a feeling of as if the spread of secularism will ultimately
displace the religion from the public life. Therefore who are for
religion must be anti-secular and vice versa. This view is not
satisfactory. In sociology, many of us maintain that secularism does not
necessarily work against religion. It does not eliminate religion from
society or even reduce its influence on individuals. It brings out some
places out of the grips of the religion such as universities, hospitals,
banks, offices etc. With the spread of secularization, there will be
more places in society where religion cease to play any [significant]
part. To give an example, a modern hospital and a modern university are
such places where religion does not play any visible role. Religion, on
these institutes, is a private thing for its member. And it is very hard
to see how these institutes can work efficiently, if they can work at
all, if they were to be governed by religious than secular rules. Is
religious pluralism is a form of secularism or perhaps it's  most
exalted form as it is increasingly maintained in India? India has a good
record in religion pluralism and tolerance. But it must not be forgotten
that it has some dark spots too. There is a great deal of sympathy for
minorities in our intellectual circles. Indeed, some of the most
unreasonable demands made my minorities are not only tolerated, they are
often encouraged. One of such demand was made by Muslims for reservation
recently. A few centuries ago, their proud forefathers were the rulers
of  most of these lands. Therefore it does not follow that they are left
behind simply because majority has denied something to them. At least
not in the way in which high castes Hindus had denied certain rights to
many low castes Hindus and women. It has to be said in all fairness that
it was also high caste Hindus above everyone else who attacked the
foundation of caste system most vigorously. It is worthwhile to note in
passing what Dr. Ambedkar said on this, 'It is wrong for the majority to
deny the existence of minorities. It is equally wrong for minorities to
perpetuate themselves.' One of the criticism of secularism is based on
these feelings that secularism helps minorities to perpetuate themselves
:  'appeasement of minorities' as it is often called. 'Dharam
nirpekhshta' or 'religious plurality' can do some of the work assigned
to secularism, but it can not do all of it. Consider a country where
there is only one religion i.e. a Christian country of Europe. In this
country admission to university was granted to those men who subscribed
to a certain church and it was denied to all women. It was secular
forces and not 'religious pluralism' which opened the gate of
universities to women. And in India, Hindu or Muslim religion are not
particularly kind to many castes and women. If people from lower castes
are allowed these days to vote or allowed to go to universities and seek
employment in those professions which were not assigned to them at
birth, and women are allowed to go to temples during their periods, it
is due to secularization of society and not due to religious tolerance
or religious plurality. Secularism is a modern value and it a new value
even in those countries where it found its first adherents. I am a
university man and wish to be on an university for rest of my life. My
whole existence depends on the fact that my university governed by
secular rules. How can I ever ask secularism to leave even when I find
that a great many things are being done in its name are against its
spirit. And those who ask secularism to leave must also ask themselves
how their life would have been if the institutions they are part of were
to be governed by religious rules. They must carefully consider what
they are abandoning and what they are asking others to abandon by
abandoning secularism. If secularism has to go, a great many things
which are essential to life of mind must also go. To the opponents of
secularism, it would make them less anxious if they see it as a 'habit
of heart' rather than an ideology. As a habit of heart, it will cease to
be anti-religion. It will only asks people what Jesus is believed to ask
his fellows, 'Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto
God the things that are God's'. -- Dilawar

###### Related articles

-   [Secularism re-examined : By Andre
    Beteille](http://dilawars.wordpress.com/2013/01/21/secularism-re-examined/)
    (dilawars.wordpress.com)
-   [Religious
    Identities](http://dilawars.wordpress.com/2012/12/10/religious-identities/)
    (dilawars.wordpress.com)
-   [Poll shows Turks want
    secularism](http://www.secularnewsdaily.com/2012/11/poll-shows-turks-want-secularism/)
    (secularnewsdaily.com)

