~~~~ 
title: Reflection: Being a Teaching Assistant
type: post
status: publish
id: 93
tag: Being a teaching assistant
category: IIT Bombay
~~~~

By most accounts, life of a Teaching Assistant (TA) is quite simple. Go
to the lab, do the assigned work and come back. If you are TA for a
theory course then professor usually asks you to do work related with
script checking, grading and other related clerk-work. There is a space
for improvement but most of the professors do not want to overburden
their TA's. They generally leave them with these routine works. For a
M.Tech. (especially first year) this is indeed needed. They have their
own tightly packed first year curriculum. But final year M.Techs as well
as Dual Degree (D.D.) sure can do more. But its up to the professor to
be thoughtful as in how he can utilize them without making them feel
like they are being consumed in something they do not want to be a part
of. Well, there can be counter argument to this. One can simply say
since you get money in exchanged of your services, you have to do what I
ask you to do. But I am not a supporter that this kind of '*money/market
oriented arguments*' should be used against young people. They mostly do
what is required. However I am not denying that some of them take pride
in shunning their responsibilities and corruption should be dealt with.
This boring part, we leave to authorities.\
\
Lab courses, where you interact with students are the places where you
can really test your capabilities as a teacher as well as a learner. You
can easily get the most remarkable assessment of your capabilities - no
need to write A, B, C, D exams. Make sure you get at least one lab
course while you are a TA else you may live forever in your own illusion
of smartness.  Well, no one suppose to know everything so its better you
don't meet your students with an attitude of *Mr. BeenThereDoneThat*.
The best you can do is to pretend that you have more experience than
them so probably you'd be able to help them. And hey, I am also
compensating what I have not done in my U.G..\
\
I found out that only a few U.G.'s are hostile to M.Tech. or to Ph.D. in
start. Neither they have any sort of superiority syndrome in the
beginning. If over the time of they somehow acquire these feelings that
P.G.s are '*give-up*', they must have their own experiences. And who can
argue us out from our own experiences.  Though there can be a chauvinism
among them but generally they are polite enough not to communicate it to
you. It's not to say that we don't see thoughtful people in post
graduation. There is much more to intelligence that cracking
competitions. And there much more to scholarship than intelligence. And
of course, there is much much more to thoughtfulness than just being
looking serious.\
\
My father did not pass high school (failed miserably in all subjects)
but in his childhood he did make awesome things. People in village
remember how he made a big tractor out of clay which used to have its
own steering system. It was washed away by rains later. This was
designed when there was no tractor in my village. Now back home, people
asks what have I made. Your father was a real engineer. You are not.
They do make a lot of sense to me.\
\
A lot of P.G. have their own biases. That is natural for grown ups. But
when you start treating them with your own sense of morality, it will
of-course irritate them. Though morality is more of less very desirable
thing in herself, but she has her own nasty habits. Her bearer thinks
that he/she has solved the puzzle of what is good and evil. She always
puts herself on the side on angels. B[esides, she always demands the
head of the
wrongdoer](http://www.nytimes.com/2008/01/13/magazine/13Psychology-t.html?pagewanted=1&_r=1).
Bertrand Russell once wrote, “*The infliction of cruelty with a good
conscience is a delight to moralists — that is why they invented
hell.*”. I have been told that in ancient Hindu culture there was no
concept of hell.  You suppose to born again and again till you get their
heaven, never to born again. Perhaps, they thought that life on earth is
hell enough. I don't think life is as bad as they used to worry about
it. Anyway, some of it is expected from a person who spent all his life
in jungles and mountains.\
\
In lab, playing around with instruments, doing different things with
things, sometime doing naughty things like cheating a bit is what most
of the teenagers do. When I think about my own U.G. days, I really feel
having no rights criticizing them. But cheating should be punished. Why
one cheat (or import) if one is competent enough? Though there are
certain conception of good and bad in our head, U.G.'s must be given
benefit of doubts. It is not a good idea expecting a great deal of
maturity from them. And it is worse expecting that they will only do
things unless to make them to do. Though a level of intolerance should
be there for academic misconduct and should be made harsher as they
advance in their studies. Fortunately such cases are rare but guidelines
must be laid out in reasonably good clarity. \
\
Experiments, by their very nature, are not boring. You are rewarded
instantly if you get them right. But they can make student frustrated
should you stuck somewhere. Debugging is not an easy task. Its takes a
hell a lot of dedication and experience and this is what U.G. generally
lacks. So the emphasis should be on to acquaint them with fundamental
ideas. If you think that experiment is complex for them then you can
give them a simple experiment and ask them to understand all the steps.
If they succeed in that than you ask them to proceed with the complex
experiment with a pat on their back. Marks are probably the thing they
are most interested in, so you can tell them that even if you are not
able to finish this complex experiments, I am grading you for your
performance in the simple experiment.\
\
An emphasis on a particular topic can be stressed or relaxed depending
on the interest of the students. Student of microelectronics may like to
spend more time on I-V characteristics of a device than it's
applications. On the same lines, a student of communication make be more
interested in amplifiers than how device functions etc. Well, at U.G.
since most of thing are generic and everyone suppose to know whatever
they are told to do in lab but I am of opinion that certain sections can
be skimmed over while some can be stressed at the cost of others if they
seems to be interested in them.  \
\
Perhaps the biggest challenge is how to get close to them without being
unreasonably generous. I have certain experiences from past  that being
friendly with them, some of them start believing that poor performance
on their part will be tolerated. They must have reason to  believe so
since our society has been like that where nepotism is deeply rooted and
they can not be much different. There are ways to sort it out by acting
professionally till you are their TA's. But making mistakes are allowed
if you have certain feedback in you to discover the error of judgment. I
did over graded few of students while I was a M.Tech. initially.\
\
\
One should not be thrifty when it comes to praise them when they work
hard. Although praising someone for being smart has its own downside,
but the criticism is the last thing an Indian kid need. We get it all
the time. [There are repercussion of these kind of praises which IITians
generally receive - for being
smart.](http://nymag.com/news/features/27840/)  The safest is praising
for their effort. Indians are generally very thrifty and mostly jealous
in praising their fellow citizen. In criticism, they will be unsparing.
My personal experience is if you are NOT able to praise someone, you
really have low self esteem or very poor understanding about the stuff
you are mentoring them. \
\
Unfortunately, grades or marks have been used as *ankush*  by Indian
teachers. It is really crass to note that the threat of bad marks is the
most ubiquitous arrangement devised by our teachers (Though here at
IITB, it is not the only arrangement, both carrot and stick are
available). Although marks work fine in controlling students as well as
making them work, but there should have been a better way. If you treat
your students like morons they will become morons. I believe that this
threat generally used by those who either wants to repress students
asking doubts or the super moralists who somehow believes that the
students are pure evil and will not work unless threatened. Well, in our
society where people like the idea of punishing the most marginalized
one. For example, committing suicide is crime in India. The guy is
already so depressed, last thing he/she needed was  to be put in lockup.
But that did not stop them to devise this law. What is the logic behind
it, if you do it once, we'll make sure you wont do it again? So this is
NOT surprising and students who are at receiving must protect themselves
from all of it  - no matter how much this irritates the authorities. But
the solution to this problem, ["How one should teach
students?](http://www.pitt.edu/%7Edruzdzel/feynman.html)" have not been
settled. If a student likes a subject then there is no problem teaching
one. But the real challenge lies with students who somehow lost all of
their interests.\
\
--\
Dilawar
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-2025901331864189481?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
