~~~~ 
title: My viva policies as a Teaching assistant
type: post
status: publish
id: 131
tag: Academic dishonesty
category: IIT Bombay
~~~~

I do not like grading others, its time-consuming and unreasonable. It is
not good to see anyone losing his confidence because of doing poorly in
some examination. But I do not see any other way to make a merit list.
Merit is very necessary evil for an institute to function. One has to
discriminate in one sense or another. I am not claiming that I can be
'fair' to everyone. No one is supposed to make decisions which are
acceptable to all but it is no excuse of making incompetent judgments.
At best one can do at this stage to state explicitly the clarity of
judgment. Since I can not avoid this process of grading others no matter
how much I dislike it, I must standardize it. Viva, for me, if I have to
do it, is a process of judging an academic merit and not filling up a
grade sheet. More and more people seem to believe that there is
'something subjective, hence arbitrary, if not capricious, about all
judgments of academic merit'. It is therefore better, they say, 'to go
by 'objective' criteria' such as if a program is working, proficiency
with tools, and 'good' (lengthy?) submissions. In the end, 'they tend to
settle for what is, after all, the most objective criterion', namely,
the job is done, squarely if not fairly, irrespective of the quality of
it. This kind of viva process is then reduced to a routine which has the
advantage of convenience, but 'deprives it of all meaning from the
academic point of view'. [1] We should leave this for industries
conducting interviews. If you are one of victim, make sure you stick to
parts you really have done. I'd discuss problems you have faced during
programming, and the deeds you have done to counter them. I probably ask
you to debug your own code after putting a small error into it (You are
not suppose to solve it, but interpret the error message. The error
message in itself could be 'misleading' so be arrogant.). Be frank! I am
also compensating for what I have missed doing during my course work so
tell anything you have discovered during your work. Discussing
methodology of design always edifying and we are going to do that. If
your implementation is not working, it is not big problem but you should
convince me that the design should work on paper or is working in your
head (at least). Expertise with 'tools' will be greatly appreciated, it
is what makes an theoretically sound engineer a good engineer. Its your
effort and not the end product which I'll try to evaluate during the
viva. End products take time and you must be obsessed with them, but not
in assignments. You just can't spend your time on one thing. Any
mis-judgement on my part, although, should be taken as my incompetency,
unfortunately, in this system, will be seen as a 'valid statement about
you'. Apologies are around! Academic honesty is very desirable. Any
instant of cheating on your part will reduce the 'trust' among teachers
and students. It will have severe effect on policies. We are already
seeing a lot of professors chanting it explicitly in a frequency never
seen before. [4] There will be a severe penalty for it. If you have
copied a part of the code (without understanding it), idea (without
giving reference) or implementation (Thats pathetic!), please let me
know before the we begin our discussion. It is appreciated but there is
no reward for honesty. 'Academic misconduct' means different thing to
different people. What may seem like a 'norm' to one could be a 'moral'
for another. I am not a big fan of morality as it exists today since it
demands the head of the wrongdoer rather than fixing the system in which
corruption is encouraged and celebrated. Besides it always put itself on
the side of the angels and believe that it has solved the puzzle of
'wrong and right'. Bertard Russel once wrote, "The infliction of cruelty
with a good conscience is a delight to moralists — that is why they
invented hell." And I must confess, I generally get tempted to punish
those whom I believe are on the wrong side of the 'morality'. Perhaps
that is why in India, committing suicide is considered a crime.
Morality, and not the rationality, is a prominent feature of Indian laws
[3]. Punishment does not act as a deterrent on grown-ups. Else
'corruption' could have been wiped out of the world by now. Still, one
can not run away from ones 'evolved sense of ethics'. Not able to honor
one's believes and morals arouse feeling of guilt and disgust. One's
looses one's character. For the sake of anyone's 'convenience', I will
not make my life miserable. My intention has never been punishing
anyone, however, as I mentioned before, any act of the 'breach of trust'
do have serious effect on the relationship between teachers and student.
You will be gone in 2-3 years, but the institute has to live on and no
institute can grown unless its family members have trust among them.
Unfortunately, this mistrust has only grown over the last few decades.
Everyone seems to be paranoid about everyone else. Anyway, for this TA,
following qualifies as the 'academic misconduct'. 1. Copying from other
sources. You are allowed to study the codes and documents written by
others, but copy and paste, or find and replace afterwards is
prohibited. In a nutshell, you suppose to know what you have written. 2.
Showing something as your own which you have not done, or you do not
know (memory lapses are allowed and desirable). If you do not have time,
please tell us in advance. You must not give it as an excuse for
cheating. One should be able to tell others what (s)he deem
unreasonable. If you have done something in your work which you think
you should have not done, don't do it. I've never had cases of cheating
but they were lab courses. But this one is my first course in which
codes are submitted. Now on, if someone got caught cheating which I
could not ignore, I'll mostly refuse to take his/her viva or report to
the instructor.  One is still welcome and encouraged to approach this TA
for normal duties. One will have to find another TA for viva tough, in
which I'll be more than happy to assist. I believe, this much 'freedom'
one must grant anyone who chose not to be a part of any of his/her
misdeeds. PS : Someone asked whether I never did any cheating.
Apparently, she was not happy with my tough stand on a student. The
sympathy which middle class extends towards corrupts, and its hostility
towards poor keep surprising me despite of their eloquent lip services.
Just for record, I did it twice, once in 3rd standard Hindi exam and
once in 9th standard physics exams.t But I believe neither I made a fuss
if caught cheating nor I let anyone accuse me of anything I did not do.
My parents call me 'a guy who lost his dime (i.e. half minded)' and they
do have plenty of reasons to believe in it. REFERENCES : [1] The idea of
natural inequality and other essays. Andre Beteille, Oxford India. [2]
There has been some studies on trust and its implication on economics
and social well being. See works of Sir Partha Das Gupta
[http://www.econ.cam.ac.uk/faculty/person.html?id=dasgupta&group=faculty].
His book, "A very short introduction to economics" treats trust in a
very readable manner. Lately, economics has been becoming more humane.
[3] The moral instincts, Steven Pinker, The New York Times, [4] Bar
Dancers, Morality, and the Indian Lawm Sonal Makhija, Economic and
Political Weekly. Sep 25, 2010 -- Dilawar
![](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2011/02/ca6cb-3794193585985230867-6275013593146326918.gif)
