~~~~ 
title: An Anthropologist Among IITians
type: post
status: publish
id: 165
tag: Campus life
tag: IITians
tag: Life in iit bombay
category: IIT Bombay
category: Indian Society
~~~~

> It's a dreadful pity when a beautifully spacious generalisation is
> upset by one or two simple facts.
> -- Neville Cardus

The doyen of Indian anthropology M. N. Srivinas said that an
anthropologist is born thrice. He is 'once-born' when he initially goes
to the field,  away from his familiar surroundings to put himself in a
world of which he has little clue. He is 'twice-born' when, on living
for some time among his chosen tribe, he is able to see things from
their view-point. To those anthropologists who are able to experience
it, this second birth is akin to Buddhist surge of consciousness for
which years of study or mere linguist facility do not prepare them. All
of the sudden, these ethnographer see world from their view point. All
ethnographer goes through first stage, a good many through the second.
But an anthropologists is really 'thrice-born' when at last he moves
away from the field to his confined world of university and and reflects
on what he has collected with a hope for a partial objectivity. I am a
once-born anthropologists and my chosen tribe is a collection of
students who are under-graduate students in Indian Institute of
Technology. I am not including graduate students here because they have
been shaped by social forces of their respective colleges where they did
their graduation. They are in-disposable for studying research culture
of IIT's.

My chosen tribe is a tiny section of Indian youth and it is very likely
that (s)he is from upper strata of urbane middle class [1]. They are
sharp and fast enough to crack JEE, an entrance examination famous for
fierce competition and toughness. Almost all students in India from
science stream who believe that they are sharp enough write this exam,
go through this competition. Success in such  huge competition boost
their confidence. They see it as a sign of mental superiority which is
reflected most vividly on the t-shirts designed by them. Many of them
were 'first boy or girl' in their respective school and I have little to
doubt that they must have been consistent in their performance at
school. It is very unlikely that they have gone through ups and downs in
their school performance for usually in our oppressive Indian society,
it is not customary to give a failed one another chance to start over
again. They are trained well in mathematics, physics and chemistry at
post high-school for they usually go for coaching classes in which these
subjects are taught at the expense of others. If some IITians are good
at languages, sports, music/arts, then it is likely that they have
learnt them before passing high-school.

**IITians AS INDIANS**

Generalising IITians is easier than generalising Indians for they all
have a very narrow social profile. The class character is evident.
Sufficiently rich and sufficiently poor people does not make it to IITs.
It is a forte of middle class which hanker after 'upward social
mobility'. Admission to IIT is as big a  status symbol in our society as
it is going abroad for higher studies. The rich need not have another
status symbol (what is the use of IIT degree if I already have money)
and poor can not afford to spend time in such pursuit. The coaching
culture further ensures that most of IITians come from upper strata of
society - schooled in 'costly' schools. Such schools admit children of
wealthy and literate enough parents. There are some exceptions who come
from sufficiently poor background and they soon start imitating their
high-class classmates.

That there is a diversity of culture, language and religion among Indian
is a scientific fact. But how much diversity of thoughts exists among
them is a hard question to answer. Indians shows tremendous uniformity
in their thoughts. They have similar family structures, marriage codes
and show a remarkable appetite for wealth, money, and power and a desire
to flaunt it. All of India practise caste system which is  becoming less
of an social evil but more of an political and bureaucratic evil. They
have extensive kinship structures and have a strong appetite for
croniesm.

Indian universities were started as a modern Institute in a deeply
divided hierarchical society. No wonders that over the time these
institutes have degraded. A great many students and teachers joining
these institutes do not come for the sake of learning or building up a
scholarships. The culture is simply not there. In such a situation, it
becomes very hard for an institute to survive, let alone flourish. Since
education is heavily linked with employment, the number of teachers or
student who seek education for employment have only increased rapidly.
The 'scholars’ becomes a minority and their views are no longer holds
much water in day-to-day functioning. A degradation becomes inevitable.
It is not to say that an institute can not regain its health. Most of
the great modern universities have had darkest of the time.

In general,  an Indian shows little or no taste for the idea of
institutes but very much interested in the cult of personality. He would
not mind lashing out on the ‘corrupt system’ but shows little or no
hesitation for the company of corrupt. IITians, being no exception shows
similar behaviours. Most of the criticism come form the people who are
able to work for the system but somehow loves to leave for better
pastures. Usually its the most skilled who leaves. The difference
between who has left, who is about to leave and who could not leave says
it all. There was some talk about this ‘brain-drain’ but the irony of
situation is lost to everyone now. Since our expatriates have taken
control of media, they have been glamorising it. Moral dilemma has been
reduced by media and Indian government with an eye on their investment
have been constantly patronising the Diaspora. No wonder that there are
more and more people willing to leave. This is only possible in a
country where green-backs are preferred over grey-cells.

Indian students have notorious coldness towards their own history. They
hardly talk political matters of the day and discourage others openly if
they do so. It is not cool to talk about politics. They seem to believe
that current-affairs is not worthy of their attention unless one is
preparing for IAS or likewise examinations. Nonetheless they scream and
shout a lot on Facebook etc about unworthiness of their politicians
whenever a policy is formed which is against their interests, both real
and imagined. When a generation is not conscious of their past, one can
safely assume that their culture is only few generations old. People do
not have interest in their past because they are not proud of it. Such
ahistoric people suffer from lack of self-esteem. It is evident when
they try to cling on to anything successful even if it is only remotely
Indian such as Sunita Williams. And they also feel very happy if someone
they admire shower some praise on them e.g. the Western media.

Such ahistoric and low on self-esteem people can not be original in
their thoughts. If one read opinions written in their most celebrated
newspaper, one finds that they proudly borrow ideas from Western media.
In fact, some of them have devoted their whole OP-ED pages for such
borrowing and flaunt it proudly. What is disturbing that these opinions
are written about those who has not spent any time in this country. And
trust me, this is not due to that Indians do not have opinions or do not
like to express themselves. Perhaps they believe that they are not
competent. Why would one import a idea or cheat in examination if one is
competent enough?

Success in academic competition creates a new sense of confidence,
perhaps more in girls than in boys. Confident people are known to make
their point forcefully and in this process, they often reveal pattern of
their mind. Often, such patterns are hazy and hard to detect but their
existence can not be denied. It is worthwhile to follow their discussion
on Facebook. Their discussion in public are self-congratulatory where
they can not stand anything 'serious, critical or uncool'. Their
magazines, circulated inside the campus, often contains some articles
which may look self-critical. But such article are not written without a
context. Either they are in praise of 'an IITian' who took the 'road
less travelled' or career in some 'social relevant section' such as
NGO's etc. One wonders if the writer of such article himself would take
his views seriously in future deciding his career.

An IITian was an Indian kid who grows up to be a middle-class teen
before becoming an IITian youth. It is hard to find anything in an
IITian which is particular to him only. Individualism is not appreciated
by Indians, nor they spend enough time being themselves. There are
exception cases but we are willing to ignore them due to their small
size. Almost all of them share common Indian traits. They act very
consistently as Indians. One difference I was able to see which
separates them from majority of Indians that they shows a very high
level of confidence (due to competitive success) and forthcoming in
their reactions. But these asserted views largely are the views of the
groups. I am still struggling to figure out one trait by which I can
classify them 'different from the others'.  Thus, to explore him, we
have to explore middle class habits and its custom, and before exploring
middle class traits, we should remark on a very curious Indian trait,
namely, its way of thinking.

**THE INDIAN WAY OF THINKING **

Is there an Indian way of thinking? I am not very confident in conceding
multiplicity  of Indian ways of thinking. I often see patterns which are
ubiquitous and sharp. Let me give some examples. These examples are
drawn from current-affairs and I assume that they are still fresh in
reader's memory. Consider the movie 'Three Idiots' which became very
popular among Indians, especially among urbane youths. One of its song
'[sunshine and
rain](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pvRwlGUolmc%26feature=related)' was
perhaps as popular those days as '[why ..
kodavari](http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded%26v=YR12Z8f1Dh8)'
is these days - a national anthem, one might say.  It is widely
perceived as 'a movie with a profound social message' or a sign that
'[real people' are 'returning to the
screen](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/columns/Harsh_Mander/article80638.ece)'.
However, Raghavendra, writing in EPW, points out many non-senses in this
movie, most important of them being a inconsistency that while the movie
describe 'Dog eat dog” and “rat race” are disparag­ing terms for
market-induced competitive­ness', at the same time this 'films show
little faith in the possibility of bypassing market in any
circumstance'. In the end of this movie, Rancho's 'affinity to the poor
children of Ladakh, the former servant’s boy Phunsukh Wangdu (Rancho
full name) can only be judged on the basis of his American patents'. Why
a movie which comes back to square one could be so popular among them
and seen as a source of inspiration by Indian youth?

The Chief Economic Adviser to the Ministry of Finance, Government of
India, wants a certain class of bribes legalised (perhaps to reduce
corruption). And says so in a paper titled “Why, for a Class of Bribes,
the Act of Giving a Bribe Should be Treated as Legal.” The paper is not
on his personal blog but up on the [Finance Ministry's
website](http://finmin.nic.in/WorkingPaper/Act_Giving_Bribe_Legal.pdf).
And the author, Kaushik Basu, an eminent economists, modestly describes
his contribution as “a small but novel idea.” which turned into “a small
but fairly radical idea” at the end of this paper. How our intellectuals
saw it? No one cared to say anything about it. It was interesting
because these 'thundering anchors who ‘skewer' politicians in television
interviews uttered not a squeak'. Now one wonders 'had this insane idea
come from a Ramdev, or even a Lalu Prasad', and not from a [certified
PLU](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/columns/sainath/article2110433.ece)(People
Like Us) member, 'imagine the fun the media would have had trashing it.'

Such patterns are most visible in our media which is for middle class by
elites. It is very hard to find [poor
people](http://dilawarsays.blogspot.com/2011/09/indian-media-and-rural-coverage.html)in
these newspapers. And thus, news coverage in media reveals a lot about
the psyche of our middle class youth. To give one particular example,
February 2011 saw one of the largest rallies staged in Delhi in years.
Lakhs of workers from nine central trade unions — including the ruling
party's INTUC — hit the streets to protest against rising food prices
and unemployment. This was many times bigger than the very modest
numbers at Anna Hazare's fast and larger than Ramdev's rollicking ‘yoga
camp.' These were workers and unions not linked to the state. P.
Sainath, writing in Hindu, says that these rallies were 'not
market-driven and corporate-funded'. They were 'expressing clearly the
interests and values of their members'. And doing so were 'fitting some
classic definitions of ‘civil society.' Interestingly, this rally was
covered by the BBC, Reuters and AFP but was mostly invisible in
mainstream Indian media except when attacked for creating traffic jams.
Times of India, Delhi edition ran a full page of coverage under the
banner headline: "Red Wave Sweeps City, Halts Traffic in Central Delhi"
and published three chosen opinions about the rally in which one
sufferers of the day's traffic snarls quoted saying, "If I find out
which party is behind this rally, I will never vote for it." Compare it
when traffic was thrown out in several part of city due to Hazare rally,
same newspaper's Delhi edition put it in its main local news page on
August 17: "City Centre Comes Alive With Marching Throngs" and elsewhere
"Massive Jams in City But Few Were Complaining". [2] In another
instance, when farmers from Western U.P., Punjab, Himachal, Haryana
marched Delhi for better sugar-cane prices,  Hindustan Times covered it
on its front page by showing  some photographs captioned that farmers
came to Delhi 'to pee on Delhi's protected monuments', 'to take away the
iron poles as souvenirs' and 'to create chaos in the city'.
[[3](http://dilawarsays.blogspot.com/2009/11/open-letter-to-richeswould-be-riches-of.html)]
It would be very hard for a concerned citizen not to sound cynical at
all of this.

Are such behaviour of inconsistency is sign of rising gulf between have
and have-nots? Wasn't media was inclusive in olden days and Bollywood
cherished and depicted poor-people life? Aren't these new but inevitable
phenomenon? I doubt it! These pattern of 'multi-speak' have been in
Indian discourse since the beginning of written civilisation.  People
only started commented on this during British time when such problems
were pointed out by more consistent Firangi. During those days, both
Englishman and 'modern Indian' were dismayed at this inconsistency.
Later, about 50 years ago, Illustrated Weekly of India, asked
knowledgeable Indians to comment on Indian character. Most of them wrote
sharp and authoritative prose. They gave different opinions but all of
them seem to agree on one thing: "the Indian trait of hypocrisy; Indian
do not mean what they say". I have often felt that there is little
relation between what an Indian say in public and what he does in
private, whether a politician or an IITian. Does Indian mislead others
by telling them inconsistent views knowingly or they do it unknowingly?
Naipaul quotes Sudhir Kakar, a sophisticated psychoanalyst, well versed
in the matters of Indian and West,

> 'generally among Indians there seems to be a different relationship to
> outside reality, compared to the one met with in the West. In India it
> is closer to a certain stage in childhood when outer objects did not
> have a separate, independent existence but were intimately related to
> the self and its affective states .... The Indian 'ego' is
> underdeveloped; 'the world of magic and animistic thinking lie close
> to the surface; so the grasp of reality is 'relatively tenuous' .
> ([page
> 56](http://books.google.com/books?id=p0NQWucD7UIC%26lpg=PA55%26ots=j9lzhJJvj6%26dq=indians%20there%20seems%20to%20be%20a%20different%20relationship%20to%20outside%20reality%26pg=PA55#v=onepage%26q=indians%20there%20seems%20to%20be%20a%20different%20relationship%20to%20outside%20reality%26f=true)
> )

Tenuous grasp of reality?  Well, that may explain why reality is missing
from our mass media. Another traits which can be added to this
inconsistency is the lack of universality.[5] It is 'OK' for me to do
this, but not for others. It is not 'right' for a politician to say
things public to enhance his vote-bank but I can exaggerate on my resume
to increase chances of myself getting a job. It is not OK for a certain
politician (who does not have a blue blood) to built statues but its OK
for others. Media has showered praise on Indra Nooyi because she is a
successful female in a largely male-dominated corporate world (How she
became successful, it does not matter here) but Mamta Banerjee or
Mayawati is denied any praise for being successful politician - a
profession which is anything but not a male-dominated one (how she
became successful is very important now).

One only has to read Manu after a little bit of Kant and one can see
this lack of universality. Manu (VIII.267)  has the following: A
Kshatriya,  having defamed a  Brahmana, shall be fined one hundred
(panas); a Vaisya one  hundred and fifty or  two hundred; a Sudra shall
suffer corporal punishment. Different rule for different  kind of
people. Even truth telling is not an unconditional imperative, as
Muller  correspondents discovered, 'An untruth spoken by people under
the influence of  anger, excessive joy, fear, pain, or grief, by
infants, by very old men, by persons  labouring under a delusion, being
under the influence of drink, or by mad men, does  not cause the speaker
to fall, or as we should say, is a venial not a mortal sin (Gautama,
paraphrased by Muller).' Compare with  ethical decree like  'Man shall
not kill', or 'Man shall not tell an untruth.' Now Manu also says, 'At
the time of marriage, during dalliance, when life is in danger, when the
loss of property  is threatened, and for the sake of a Brahmana
...whenever the death of a man of any  of the four castes would be
occasioned by true evidence, falsehood was even better  than truth.'

Contrast this with Kant's well-known formulation of his imperative: 'Act
as if the maxim of your action were to become through your will a
Universal Law of Nature'. 'Moral judgements are universalizable', says
Mackie. What is universality? Universalisation means putting oneself in
another's place - it is the golden rule of the New Testament, Hobbes'
'law of all men': do not do unto others what you do not want done unto
you.'

But to be moral, for Indians, is to particularise-- to ask who did what,
to whom and when. Hegel shrewdly noted this Indian slant: 'While we say,
"Bravery is a virtue of man" the Hindoos say, on the contrary, "Bravery
is a virtue of the Cshatriyas" , (Hegel ca. 1827: First part, Sect. 2,
'India'). In Indian folk tales, there are some other patterns also, but
discussing them here would take us way to far.

I have  a personal experience with IITians which may be able to
vindicate this well formed thesis. I have spent some time on[IITB group
of literature
enthusiast](https://groups.google.com/forum/%23%21forum/iitblitzkrieg).
I posted some lengthy posts there which were related to literature in
one way or other. Posting lengthy posts is not admired in any Indian
groups although Indians love to talk a lot. There were some reactions
when I compared their beloved newspaper TOI with a 'a right wing
newspaper turning into a soft-porn magazine' on the group but they were
calmed down by one of them. who supported me, "

> Everyone chill the fuck out. This is turning into a handbaggy
> free-for-all. However irrelevant this discussion may be on this group,
> however long-winded Dilawar's posts may be for the likes of us with
> short attention-spans, he did revitalise this group with actual
> LITERARY discussions.. something that I haven't really seen too many
> of on this LIT group.

Later, I posted some tales from my village. Now an Indian is inclined to
think or at least speak well of a village, they do not show much
inclination for knowing anything about it or company of a villager. So
such an email consisting tales from a village, no matter how real, would
never be appreciated in private. But in public, they would not ask me to
stop posting such things. So some alibis has to be formed:

> While I appreciate your efforts to increase literary enthusiasm, I am
> afraid your long posts have really taken their toll on me. A better
> suggestion, just give a link to your blog here once and let people
> decide whether to see them or not. A better way is to link your blog
> to social networking sites if publicity and visibility is an issue you
> are dealing with.
> No offence intended. Just a passing thought that I felt you should no
> because I am not the only alone with this issue.
> You are free to take my suggestion or ignore it.
> Thank you for your time.

And, given the lack of argument to stop 'tales' from a group of literary
enthusiasts, one remarked

> Up  until now this group was a medium for sharing interesting
> Lit-related links, fun lit threads and information about various
> events happening inside the insti and outside. Lately, your mails seem
> to outnumber all the rest of them altogether. Whether that is a good
> thing for you, or a bad thing about the group I don't know. But they
> have been taking attention away from some of the mails about events
> etc.

Now if a group is for literary enthusiast but worry about number of
creative emails. Why asks a cricket enthusiast why he plays so much of
it? He also suggested me a better platform to 'popularise my blogs'. I
wonder what sort of email I would have got if I were to be an U.G.
(People Like Them) for posting the same lengthy stuff. But we'd never
know this! I un-subscribed and when I went to class, I told my friend
who did his UG from here that finally they kicked me out. He just smiled
back.

Till now I do not have any experience which weakens the above theory of
Indian habit of hypocrisy and to particularise. Take for instance, Anna
Hazare, a 78 year old youth icon. On his home turf, the village of
Ralegan Siddhi, in the district of Ahmednagar in Maharashtra, Mr Hazare
is known to be a fearsome patriarch, one who believes in flogging sense
into drunkards, prescribes vegetarianism and insists that people stay
away from ‘bad films’ and have similar views about 'valentine days and
other stuff' as of Shiv Sena. Yet he is a youth icon.

Such 'context sensitive thinking' in their arguments was also visible in
their 'Youth of Equality' forum rejecting 'affirmative action' popularly
known as 'reservation'. Some of them have even suggested Darwinian maxim
'survival of the fittest' as a counter-argument. If the argument is
applied consistently then why Ajmal Kasab should be punished? Isn't he
fit enough to attack and survive? Director of a movie, 'India untouched'
during Q/A forum in IIT Bombay got irritated while answering a
persistent young questioner who was not able to see a single right thing
in policy of reservation. In the end he told him, 'Bhai teri pareshaani
ye hai ki teri gand main aag lagi hai '.

Another important aspect of Indian thinking is the way we perceive
rules. A rule is an agreement agreed upon by majority in 'public' that
they will follow it. How we follow rules emphasise how consistent we are
in public and private. Indian roads are perhaps the best example where
traffic rules are discarded at people whim. But the basic idea behind
these 'rules' also suffer from Indianness. From the behemoth state to
the smallest government Institute, there is an addiction to 'create
rules of every kind and to the last detail'. After these rules are
created to the last details, they are discarded. And then there is a
demand for new one. These 'activity of creating a rule and discarding
the same' is not a malfunction of  government but it is rather a Indian
culture of dealing with rules. There are many people who are aware of
this and disturbed by it but they can do little about it. [Irawati
Karve](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Irawati_Karve) has given this rule
about Indian society and it seems to be always operative, 'The addition
of new rules does not lead to the elimination of old ones; they are
simply put into cold storage, to be taken out when required to trip up
any unwary newcomer who tries to inject some dynamism into the system.'
To see this rule in action, you should try to do something
unconventional, as I tried on IITb literature forum or Indian Ocean
tried to do with Indian music.

**THE CAMPUS LIFE**

Environment in IITs is very competitive. Students openly compete with
each other and show usual Indian curiosity to know how others are doing.
They seem to cherish when others fails or do not do as good as them.
Such behaviour is common to Indian youth but it is stronger among
IITians.

Students who come from 'sufficiently humble strata of society' can not
be very confident of themselves in such competitive and class-conscious
environment. I remember how my classmate scorn at me first time I
revealed that I do not know English since I studied in a rural school.
They nicknamed me 'gaonwala' (a villager). It is not to say that I was
discriminated or mocked at every time but how one suppose to increase
his self-esteem and confidence when your status among your colleagues is
fixed by your ability in English - a foreign language. There is often
sympathy for 'less-privileged' student but it does not change their
status among their 'better accent Anglophone' classmates. There is
curious attitude among Indians towards English language. English is not
only an important intellectual asset but also a yardstick to measure one
social status. There is no easier way to put someone in his proper place
than pointing out deficiency in his English. This habit of seeing
English as a measure of social status is more acute in Indian females
than it is in Indian males for they often change their accent to sound
more 'classy' while visiting a supermarket or conversing in open.

I am of the view that an IITian is a highly skilled but a typical Indian
youth. Most of them liked to be perceived as intellectually curious but
they show little enthusiasm in knowing anything which would not be
'valuable' in their chosen career or to say it bluntly 'which they can
not put on their resume'. They are much more interested in foreign
places (read U.S. and Europe) and  a life there than their own country.
When they go to these places, during intern-ships etc., they do not seem
to talk about things they have learned over there for no one seems to be
much interested in them. However a bunch of photographs depicting best
of places (where they themselves marginalised in the background to
emphasis the grandness of the place) would circulate on social
networking sites. He drools and gushes over foreign universities as
strongly as a youth in Indian villages do for high-school diploma.
Neither IITians or a village youth understands whether these foreign
university or high-school diploma has any worth in his profession but
where education is perceived a vehicle of upward social mobility, such
behaviours are expected and it is naive to expect that they would be
interested in building their profession before enhancing their
social-profile. A few of them, however, have shown a remarkable concern
for their home institute.

There are some who stays back to get another degree from IIT. Their
classmates often wonder why he chose to stay. It is interesting that two
explanation are put forward to explain such insanity : (a) He could not
get a place after applying everywhere. (b) He is some sort of idealist.
I am yet to see that someone saying that (s)he chose to stay because
(s)he may have found this place congenial enough.

IITians are fast at grasping ideas. You tell them something and they
often find it 'obvious'. However how many of them are capable of
producing an 'obvious ideas' is an open question. Consuming an idea and
producing one takes different kind of skills. For a U.G., the ability to
consume an idea is more rewarding in exam then producing one for one is
graded how well one can regurgitate after digesting something. Exams do
not give any incentive for creativity so a person who is coming out with
impressive grades after his completion does not guarantee that such a
person will have impressive new ideas. Creativity can not be taught, one
has to keep it safe and protect it from onslaught. A culture like of
IITs is capable of killing creativity, if there is any. But I can not
see any other way to run an institute effectively without having an exam
system. How well exams are designed and conducted is up to the
professors.

The role models of IITians are successful and strong young people. Such
people are often found in semi-technical (or one would say
semi-literate) profession of management, media and television. They do
not seem to be interested in knowing products of their own department
who has excelled in other fields. If someone has come to lecture, they
prefer to know 'where he studied' over 'what he did'. Labelling is more
important then real work he has done. Most of them do not appreciate
people by their work. Perhaps, at their age, they are not able to.

IITians criticise IIT in same ways a resident Indian criticise India.
When they leave IIT, one can see them getting nostalgic. They can be
seen admiring time spent in IIT. Such behaviour was first seen in
expatriate Indians. Our NRIs tend to be very patriotic. When they were
in India, they would criticise it (why would they leave otherwise) and
as soon as they land in foreign land, they turn desperately Indian and
seem to be very much concerned about its political affairs. This is
perhaps an extension of one derisive ethnographer commented about
Bengalies, 'All those Bengalies I knew who at twenty marched with party
chanting 'cholbe na', are now at forty work in some U.S. university'.
Can such people, no matter how loud, be taken seriously?

**THE CRITICS**

There are many  among IITians who do not find anything good in their
fellow IITians. These IITians often claim to work in some 'socially
relevant section'. They take another point of view of education
altogether that education is not a vehicle for success but a way to make
able and concerned citizen.  They laments that IITians are not doing
anything worthwhile for society. Why a section of them have chosen to be
a self-hating activists rather than self-congratulatory whiz kids is
hard to say? Perhaps they felt guilt about their own relative privilege
which could be best assuaged by adherence to a philosophy which assured
them that they are on the right side. Such people see things from a
moral point of view and can be very caustic in their opinion. IITian
point of view, like of Indian middle class, oscillates between 
self-congratulation and  self-recrimination but it is largely on the
side of self-congratulation and very often it sounds narcissist.

The fact that the IITs, despite of all their shortcomings, has remained
floated as an island of excellence in a large sea of mediocrity in a way
only a few institutes has remained so is worthy of praise. The
contribution of IITians towards these institute has been immense
although they preferred giving away their money rather than their
experiences and skills. If some of them get frustrated by the fact that
little has been done by IITians for their country then this frustration
is an outcome of a high-expectation they themselves have put on IITians.
Nowhere in this world, middle class has worried about someone else
interests before securing its own and it is naive to believe that that
Indian middle class would do otherwise.  Whenever middle class extends
its own interests, it extends them as the interest of the whole society
and that makes them sound selfish. Since Indian middle class is small in
size, it looks more self-serving. These IITians who are shaped by social
forces can not be very different. Since their size is even smaller and a
high expectation has already been put of them, they face the same level
of criticism as any other small and self-serving section of middle
class, most notably,  politicians and bureaucrats face.

It is curious that they understand their behaviour of hypocrisy clearly
- listen to them talking with their friends about it, or cartoons
published in their campus magazines - but they seem helpless to make
their cherished choice on the 'D-day'. They do not do such things out of
ignorance. They know what they doing and they know it very well but they
would not say so in public. So a blame must be put on either system or
his institute: 'No (real) research happens in IIT', 'they do not pay
much' etc.. And if some of them come back later, I have my doubts
whether he is plan to do that job as a vocation or simply because he was
not 'fit enough to survive' in his first choice. Like children of Nehru,
who after failing miserably in their chosen career, took their mother
advice and turned to a 'easier life' in Congress where a place was
reserved for them at the top.

END NOTES :

[1] The definition of middle class is borrowed from this book, 'The
middle class in colonial India'. In nutshell, A middle class is a class
which has a profound voice and influence public discourse like no other.

[2] Media as Echo Chamber: Cluttering the Public Discourse on
Corrupption, Sukumar Muralidharan, EPW, Sep 10, 20011 Vol XLVI No 37, pp
21

[3] Is there an Indian way of Thinking? An informal essay, A. K.
Ramajunan, 1959

[4] Yuganta - End of an epoch, Irawait Karve.

[5] [The problems of universal in Indian
philosophy](http://www.jstor.org/stable/3217705), Dravid, Raja Ram 1972.
Delhi, Motilal Banarisidass.

--

Dilawar

![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-5259016649644797382?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
