~~~~ 
title: Criticism and Witch-hunt
type: post
status: publish
id: 645
tag: witch-hunting
category: Indian Culture
category: Indian Media
category: Aside
~~~~

Our newspapers are filled with articles and news-reports where all sorts
of accusations and allegations can be found. People in India, like
people in many other countries, were not any less enthusiastic in the
past for lashing out at their politicians, bureaucrats or any
public-office holder but the style and content of this activity has been
changed greatly by Internet and media. It is more common these days to
find people accusing not only public figures but also their colleagues
for some wrong or corrupt conduct.

Criticism is an important intellectual activity and it is desirable that
a society takes a critical view of itself. Criticism can take many forms
and some of them can be destructive in long run. It is all to good if
people in a society are critical in sober and constructive ways. Their
are ample scope for other forms of criticism too such as polemic, satire
etc. My intention here is to point out some forms of criticism which can
easily take a destructive form.

One form of criticism is whistle-blowing where a corrupt practices of a
colleague is brought out in public. Usually the whistle-blower belongs
to the same institute. Tradition of whistle-blowing is perhaps a healthy
tradition in long run for it keeps the rot in an institute in check. But
there is more to it. Whistle-blowing is most effective when it is done
in the interest of institute for purposes such as maintaining ethical
standards. But those who do it not always motivated by the desire to
maintain ethical standard for ethical standards can also be maintained
by internal censure effectively. Whistle-blowing is mostly if not always
done to settle personal scores. And it can scare people to avoid taking
decisions which can easily be painted as wrong decisions. Here if
nothing to expose, an honest mistake or any decision can be presented as
corrupt practice. A charge can also be fabricated out of imagination.
And it is naive to believe that those who are labeled as politicians are
the only one who do it.

Lately, there has been a constant tirades against government by civil
society, a term which is not easy to define. When trust is low between
state and people, people like to believe in anything, not only against
the government but also against whole state machinery. Sooner or later
it becomes a habit, a sort of fashion, to accuse government even when
evidences in support are lacking. To give an example : one social
activists [accused government of
conspiracy](http://zeenews.india.com/news/nation/team-anna-smells-govt-conspiracy-behind-power-failure_790587.html)
when northern-grid failed and there was a blackout. Those who have read
about the emergency in India during Indira Gandhi rule will find a great
deal of similarities between her habit of making conspiracy theories
about a western hand trying to do some harm to the integrity of India.
Nationality of this hand was always in doubts or never revealed but its
color was believed to be white.

Much of it can be understood and explained in terms of lack of trust
between citizens and governments. But what about people, even those with
nothing against each other, are picking up this tradition of criticism
and arguments. Visit any newspaper's unmoderated discussion threads
(such as Times of India) or Facebook groups; one sees little enthusiasm
for constructive dialogue. They love to get personal and accuse each
other for being timid, morally corrupt or stupid or all of it. It is
curious that even those who are very polite and considerate off-line can
get so caustic and aggressive on-line.

The central idea behind any healthy tradition of argument is to play the
ball and not the man. But when the activity of arguments is confused
with entertainment, it must be very hard for them to resist the
temptation to have some fun by playing the man. Indians love to have
different opinions and they tend to be very argumentative. They find it
very hard to consider different positions and agree with any of them but
their own, especially during a debate. A Canadian diplomat has observed
rather light-heartedly that in India the challenge is 'to get people
agree with you even if they do' while in China 'the challenge is to get
people disagree with you, even if they do'.

One of the rants one hears almost every day is that [almost] everyone in
India is corrupt, stupid or selfish. It should not be hard to show that
all people, even most of them, are not corrupt or perverse in a society.
For if they were so that particular society would have met an evil fate
long ago. But proving a fact is one thing and caught in the feelings is
another. In a society where someone accuses everyone else of some
wrongdoing or having an evil character or both, it is not unnatural for
people to develop feelings that being so must be the natural state of
their society.

Moreover, there is a lot of hidden energy in our society which has not
been explored properly and systematically. This energy not only works
against any critical view of Indian society, it is often used against
individuals trying to do harmless things. If someone is participating in
the classroom then he has to face comments like 'Sala, trying to be
smart!' or some scornful faces after the class. If someone is writing
posts on a discussion group then he must be motivated by reasons not
entirely laudable. If someone has shown some concerns about a scientist
seeking blessing from a petty god-man for the successful launch of
satellite then 'it is the usual shenanigans' on his part. If a teaching
assistant has not given 10 out of 10 marks then he has to responds to
emails justifying his decision. If a professor has supported LAN ban in
IIT Bombay then he must be driven by some ill-feeling against students
or perversity. And if the director of an IIT has supported government's
reforms (or changes) in IIT-JEE then the director of some other IIT
accuse him of having 'hidden agenda' and “irresistible urge to manage
other IITs'.

We have been passing through a phase in which every disorder is
explained by the irrational belief of every kind : a secret hand, a
hidden conspiracy, an evil personality. This is partly because the habit
of thinking clearly and rationally about the social condition around
oneself takes time to become established among people ( I often felt how
hard it is). This way of looking at social order responsible for
personal or public misfortunes is a modern one, even in those societies
where it was preached first. And it demands a great deal of isolation of
mind from moral-excitement and passions of all sorts. Such a habit and
intellectual discipline associated with it has not acquired a strong
foothold in our society, even among intelligentsia. And those who can
lay foundation of such a culture -- newspapers and magazines -- are now
acting against it. Moreover, our own traditional intellectual culture
lends itself easily to fatalism : either a fatalistic acceptance of the
existing order of the thing or a fatalistic withdrawal from the concerns
of this world.

It is not only the lack of intellectual habits and presence of abundant
energy hostile to anything odd, critical or different in outlook causing
damage to our intellectual culture but also a growing taste for what can
be compared with witch-hunting in medieval Europe. This is most visible
on our news channels which are now competing with entertainment
industries. And it is trickling down to the connected masses. These are
secular forms of witch-hunting and it grows rapidly in certain kind of
social environment : when people believe that it is some hidden hand or
some evil personality and not some social-construct or collectivities
which are responsible for the misfortune. It is most unfortunate that
any society develops a taste for it. It spreads with and spreads
cynicism. Anthropologists have studied witch-hunting for a long time and
concluded that it is the most dangerous social-construct ever invented
by man-kind. For it deranged accused and accuser alike.

--

Dilawar
