~~~~ 
title: Neglect of history and obsession with the past 
type: post
status: publish
id: 731
tag: Obsession with past
category: Culture and history
category: Indian Media
~~~~

One of our historians has noted, rather ruefully, the lack of taste for
accurate historical writing. 'India, for its great literary heritage',
noted D. D. Kosambi, 'has produced no historical writers comparable to
Herodotus,
[Thucydides](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thucydides "Thucydides"),
Polybius, Livy, Tacitus'. Despite of the fact that many Indian kings of
the middle ages were  not only 'incomparably superior in their education
and literally ability to contemporary rulers in Europe', they also
'personally led great armies to victory in heavy warfare'. None of them
consider it worthwhile to write anything comparable to Caesar's
Commentaries or Xenophon's Anabasis. 'The tradition was of graceful
court drama, an occasional hymn in praise of the gods, or a witty
epigram'. Kosambi commented further that only Rajatarangani written a
Kasmirian named
[Kalhana](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kalhana "Kalhana")  (A.D.
1149-50) and continued by two successors can be called anything like a
historical document. And 'this chronicles suffer from all the mannered
conventions of Sanskrit poetry, in particular the fatal double entendre
that manages only to obscure whatever reality the author meant to
portray'. Even when the period Kalhana was describing was 'a period was
of desperate struggle between the central power and feudal lords in
Kashmir', he cared not to note the 'actual time and place' which can
'hardly be compared in quality, depth, content to the account by
Thucydides of the Peloponnesian war'. For the rest of the country, till
the Muslim period, we have nothing even as good as Kalhana. Some older
written records which survived such as Puranas ( = the ancient stories),
'are only religious fables and cant with whatever historical content the
works once possessed heavily encrusted by myth, diluted with
semi-religious legends, effaced during successive redactions copied by
innumerable, careless scribes'. Forget constructing the past from it,
one can not even make 'as must as king-lists' [1]. Judging the quality
of contemporary historical writing in learned journals and books is
beyond me. However, it is easy to notice apathy towards history around
us. Many of Indian states are bigger than most of the European countries
but a few books are being written about what can be called their
history. National scene is somewhat better. There is no channel
dedicated to history worth the name. And I wonder about the numbers of
Indians who can tell their family lineage which goes back more than 2-3
generations (I plead guilty). The prominence of oral culture at the cost
of written culture for knowledge-exchange can not be the main reason
behind this for one notices that they do like to talk about history
either. There is perhaps something in our culture which makes us
indifferent to our history. When a British born Indian historian
wondered about this Indian apathy towards it historical monuments, he
was told by an Indian friend, "You must understand that we are Hindus
and we burn our dead." Yet, there is an increasing obsession with the
past. This obsession has little to do with knowing the past accurately
but it is largely animated by a desire to glorify it. Tradition of
dispassionate pursuit of history never had a strong presence in India
and our current value-system does not encourage it either. It is a
widely shared belief among students and their parents that history (any
form of humanities indeed) is a subject which only last on the
merit-list would take-up in school and a real looser will pick it up for
a profession. One needs not be a psychologist to notice the growing
feelings of misery among Indian about their nationality. This feeling is
sustained by lack of coherence and dignity in the present. But much of
it also goes back to our close encounter with western powers during
colonization which humbled our traditional pride and took away a part of
our dignity. If one looks at the writings of Indian intellectuals during
this time, they were doing two things simultaneously : telling people
abroad how great are things Indian (its spirituality, its way of life,
the whole civilization indeed) and used superlatives to describe them;
and castigating fellow-citizen at home for this-and-that and asking them
to change their medieval mindsets and customs. Indeed, most of the
reformers who went abroad to deliver lectures were of this kind. They
painted India as 'greatest civilization' abroad and they felt ashamed of
the same civilization's current state at home and prodded their
countrymen with great emotional appeal to change [2]. Their heirs have
now started talking about India and Bharat. They themselves belong to
India which contains what is all good and rest of us belong to the
Bharat, an unchanging and backward country for which they only have
scorn and pity. Educated people are self-consciously virtuous
everywhere, in India they are excessively so. Indians are deeply
conscious of being Indian. They really feel proud when a match is won by
their team, a rocket is successful launched by ISRO, a missile is tested
by DRDO, one of their movies is given or nominated for a Oscar, an
Indian buys a company abroad, a person with Indian name goes to space,
and an Indian is recognized by western world. And they flaunt this pride
aggressively. Western awards have come to mean a great deal to them.
Their newspaper's global news is all about Indians doing well abroad.
The xenotrophism  -- the attraction to the foreign, this loving (and
hating) preoccupation with what Kingsley Amim called "abroad" -- is to
be accounted for largely by the sense of superiority of foreign things
and the inferiority of Indian things. The obsession has reached to a
level that one of our more exuberant psychologists has noted that if
good Indian and good Chinese has lived a virtuous life, they  have
started going not to heaven but to New York. Abroad has become a
status-symbol and it is chased with a great zeal. It perhaps makes them
lower on their self-esteem but it helps them stand tall is a deeply
status-conscious society. Those who are left behind despite trying
really hard develops a growing sense of social-worthlessness and also
suffer from an acute sense of inferiority. The difference between who
has left, who is about to leave and those who could not leave can do
real harm to their self-esteem. Present and Future of India do not offer
them any possibility to overcome these feelings either.  The media and
newspapers are competing with each other to spread the feelings of
misery about present and future. They try to overcome this by
constructing two nations theory. Their newspapers are filled with
stories telling them how pathetic is the situation is in their country;
and it has become a fashion among intelligentsia to find a crisis
everywhere. It is not entirely their fault if they feel sad, ashamed and
miserable about India. Nonetheless, they are mortified by all of this.
They see it more of an outcome of some moral deficiency rather than an
outcome of their own actions which can be changed. This can only lead to
fatalism and the enhanced feelings of misery about being Indian itself.
History, especially when it is poorly documented, can be invoked with
great effect to lessen these feeling of misery. And an increasing number
of Indians are willing and even eager to be convinced of the myths of
national greatness and glory. It is a seductive myth and like all myths,
when evidence in support are lacking, they are created and easily
accepted. History demands that when evidence are lacking,  the argument
must rest without a conclusion but those who are already determined to
conclude something about their past, myth and not history offers them
vast opportunities. Indian civilization has many achievements to its
credit and there is nothing wrong for feeling proud about it. But when a
past is invoked in India, as in many other countries which locates their
utopia in the past, it is usually to glorify its achievements and not to
speak of its failings. It is unbelievable that any nation can have only
achievements and no failing. What do they try to achieve by brushing a
nation's failings under the carpet rather than elevating the moods?
Nonetheless, those who are told of the grandeur of past also see the
misfortune of present. And it is [explained due
to](http://www.telegraphindia.com/1031011/asp/opinion/story_2433186.asp)
'the intervention of colonial rule' and the plunders by ruthless
attackers before them.

> The same text-books that represent the India of the past as a land
> overflowing with milk and honey also represent colonial rule as a
> period of relentless plunder, spoliation and degradation.... The
> British were no doubt alien intruders who disrupted a contented and
> harmonious way of life. But were they the first or only intruders to
> do so' What our radical and liberal historians have started is being
> continued further back into the past by other historians. A recent
> account of the pristine greatness of India and its spoliation by the
> British ends by saying that perhaps the gloom had set in earlier,
> around AD 1000. Who were the bearers of this pre-British gloom' Could
> they have been Afghans, or Turks' The myth of the destruction of
> everything that was good in India by the British has extensions that
> may not all be pleasing to those who have contributed to its making.

There are many among us who are too willing to construct  a past where
there is only grandeur and glory and no failing. And almost all of us
are too willing to accept this version of past as the only version. It
may have been a great tool in elevating the mood of many Indians but
this mood-lifting by construction of myths is not going to do much good
to their self-esteem. The obsession with 'glorious past' is sustained by
hatred for the present and little hope for the future. The reasons
behind this hatred may not be easy to find or remove [2]. And these
seductive myths are not going to help remove it. But this obsession with
glorious past can easily divert attention from the dispassionate pursuit
of history. History is best pursued by those dispassionate individuals
who have the desire to know what they really were and not by those who
see history a tool to overcome the state of feeling sorry for
themselves. References  : [1] An introduction to the history of Indian
history, D. D. Kosambi, pp9-10 [2] The intimate enemy, loss and recovery
of self under colonial rule, Ashis Nandy -- Dilawar
