~~~~ 
title: Privacy and secrecy
type: post
status: publish
id: 142
tag: privacy
tag: secrecy
category: Indian Society
~~~~

There will not be any civilization worth the name if it does not grant
certain amount of privacy to its members. But different civilizations
put different premium on it.  Privacy does not fascinate Indians much.
Most of us will see it with indifference. I am not aware of a large
amount of work done on 'privacy' by our sociologists. We lack a sound
theory on it. Our understanding and appreciation of privacy is very low.
However, some changes can be seen occurring in favor of privacy. Most of
these changes are an outcome of 'globalization' and industrialization
which are rather new phenomenon. Globalization and industrialization are
forcing Indians to deal with other cultures where people put a high
premium on privacy. Recently, a comparative study was done by CMU on how
Americans and Indians perceive privacy [2]. Even in the most enlightened
circles of Indian scholarship, privacy was given scant attention. It is
well known that [Indian
constitution](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constitution_of_India "Constitution of India")
which is a well elaborated document does not guarantee the right to
privacy as a fundamental right. It seems that the architects of our
constitution did not get curious about privacy and implications it might
have on our society. However, the Supreme Court in two recent rulings
has included the right to privacy within the ambit of the fundamental
right to ‘personal liberty’ as embodied in Article 21. It would be
interesting to watch how the apex court enlarges the scope of this right
for the cases it will decide in the future' [3]. But these are somewhat
technical points  and their effects will be limited to a certain section
of society which is very vocal about right and it is this section which
usually defines what is forward-looking and socially acceptable. Privacy
is often confused with 'ekant' (loneliness). Although loneliness
guarantees privacy but it is rather a harsher restriction. If I am among
many people, I can ask for privacy but not for loneliness. Privacy does
not require loneliness as such. I can expect others, even friends, not
to look into my mobile Inbox, not to inquiry about the girl I am often
seen with, and worst of all, not to disturb me when I am thinking or
working in my room. When people around you fail to honour this request
then there is a great need for 'loneliness'. I wonder whether loneliness
is the only escape from this transgression on privacy in my country?
This is perhaps why rishi-munis who did most of the intellectual work in
ancient India preferred to live in Jungles and mountains. Indians put a
very little value of privacy, at the same time, they delight in secrecy.
If one think about it, it is the lack of privacy which manifest itself
in the love for secrecy. One can safely say that it depends on
individual dispositions, but 'dispositions towards privacy is encouraged
in some societies and discouraged in others'. So the disregard of
privacy among Indians is also a question of how the Indian society is
organized and culture constituted. It may be argued that Indians have a
cold or negative attitude towards privacy because they are too many and
have been living in joint families and closely knitted communities. They
have evolved in a cultural environment which is incompatible if not
hostile towards individual privacy. Their household size is large
compared to many other societies. But one can ask whether the large
household size or a big joint family is the outcome of negative attitude
towards privacy? Also, one can also ask whether in old times, the design
of houses were friendly to individual privacy? There are few personal
experiences I had from childhood which shows this coldness towards
personal privacy. I used to stay alone, sit in the corner and watch
people in my house which was a joint family. Some old ladies would come
to our home and tell my mom that I might be a mentally retarded kid
since I didn't play with other children. In fact,  in villages there is
hardly any privacy at homes. The houses are not designed to protect
privacy of its member, not even from outsider. Anyone from neighborhood
can come and go freely. Though their are social norms one has to follow
e.g. if a house has young girls and newly wedded brides then males are
not allowed inside house without informing the lady-of-the-house or
without making some noises at the door but old women can come and go
any-time and any-place without any restriction. In our colleges, the
urbane places, attitudes towards privacy are hardly different. Most of
the colleges will not give single room to a single person, perhaps due
to resource constraint. In my hostel a room is given to one student.
There might be some other institutes in country where a room is alloted
to an individual rather than to a group of students. Even in such
hostels, at any given time, you will find that the hostel room is either
empty or occupied by more than one; usually chating, watching movies,
cracking jokes and laughing etc. This is an usual and very much expected
behavior. Once a person knocked at my room and asked about some
student's room number. When I told him that I do not know about any of
the students living here, he could not digest it. He asked with a
amusing surprise on his face, "*You do not know your neighbors?*" For
some it could a boon. A Japanese anthropologist, [Chie
Nakane](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chie_Nakane), was delighted by this
lack of privacy among a West Bengal Village. Japanese do not have
extensive kinship like Chinese and Indians do.[They place a certain
value on privacy within the domestic
domain](http://www.alanmacfarlane.com/DO/filmshow/nakane_fast.htm). No
such value is placed here. Nakane was with a lady who could go to any
house, moved freely and easily, and could show her their possessions at
she was in her house. As a Japanese she was shell-shocked, but was
delighted as an anthropologist. The point here is that the 'desire of
privacy which may be more than the desire to be alone at certain place
at certain time is best viewed with suspicion in India' [2]. If you put
a lot of premium on your privacy and are of seclusive nature; then you
will be seen as an oddity at best, or some arrogant or a mentally
retarded human being. Outcome of such neglect of privacy could be
anything but helpful for intellectual growth of an individual. Indian,
who grows up in the company of others, tends to be emotionally depended
on their peer group to an unusual degree. He would prefer to do anything
but to remain alone even though he is aware that he is not getting any
time for himself. Here is an example. It is paradoxical that our
students are so vocal about the problem what they call 'peer pressure'.
But the same student who can elaborate the problem so nicely (as our
economists and politicians do with problems of farmers and tribal) find
herself helpless when the day to make a choice which is different than
traditionally made choices. It is possible that so called 'peer
pressure' which can be seen as another fallout of lack of privacy.  This
predisposition towards '[you think therefore I
am](http://www.hindu.com/mag/2009/03/15/stories/2009031550120400.htm)'
[1] is so deeply rooted that it forces them to sacrifice their
individualism for some praise and approval they could extract from their
peer group. The career they tends to pick does not seem to be choice
taken by an individual free will but it looks like that their options
are rather dictated by the classmates or peer groups. One also hear
about the lack of original ideas in research done in India at most of
the places of higher learning. This has much to do with their disregard
of privacy. The inability of Indians to produce any new theory or
something original is not solely due to lack of abilities or limitations
of systems. Though they put blame on systems that it is not conducive
for research. System is only the collective reflection of individuals in
it.  Ideas cross the path of an individuals when he is alone. Max Weber
used to say that '*ideas come to you when they please and not when it
pleases you*'. They surely do not come to those who are always in others
company. True, that even one has some idea, he must posses some backbone
to defend it. Indian society and system are often accused for not being
very sympathetic in supporting unorthodox ideas and self-criticism. But
if an Individual in not able to even think for himself then is there any
point fighting and cursing shadows? A reason of such disregard of one's
authentic-self lies in the way we are raised as a kid. In our families,
an individual is promoted differently as a person. It has been said that
an Individual is open and connected in India, while in West he is
bounded and discreet. Western people build an individual wall around
themselves. It is not to say that they do not make relationships but the
limits of these relationships are well defined and carefully kept in
mind. One often sees in their movies that parents knock at their
children room and usually request for entrance. In India, Individual is
the property of the family, kin-group or the community. The boundaries
of individuals are kept open and their lives flow into each other.
However, these contrast should not be overdrawn but their existence can
not be denied. In society like ours, where individuals are supposed to
be open and connected all the time, has its own strain. The group or
family exerts pressure on its individual that they should be open and
connected. But no one can be open and connected at all the times. Young
girls studying outside their home often suffers the worst of it. Not
only their mothers ask them where they were if they fail to return home
in specified time, hostel wardens as well as neighbors also show a keen
interest in their personal life. Secrecy becomes the natural defense
against these excessive demand for gregariousness. People who are forced
to live in each other pockets develop this special urge to be secretive.
Those Indians who were able to maintain a certain amount of privacy
during the ordinary course of their life become less secretive. It is no
surprise that seclusive Indians (such as Gandhi and Godse) were also the
least secretive. Secrets have a luxuriant subterranean life and their
flow is guided by well marked channels. The gossips network which is a
fundamental part of any Indian friendship network is an outcome of this
deep urge to know others personal affairs. That two women friends can
not sit silently may be a truism, it is also no less true about two male
friends. The rigor of gossiping may vary but both gender seem to be
equally interested in others people lives. People who are sensitive
about such pattern of gossiping naturally feels uncomfortable when they
imagine themselves becoming a part of it behind their back. The
fascination for secrecy can become an end in itself which is mostly
visible in mature and middle-aged person. They tend to make secrets out
of trivial matters, most of which are common knowledge. It is not hard
to see why such lack of privacy can not help improving the quality of
intellectual fabric of our society. It is all well known that Indian
sages hated living close to town and villages and admired jungles and
mountains. Some of our best intellectuals were the product of seclusion
and they often praised it as 'ekant'. Prince Siddhartha can be cited as
one example. Nehru's best work was done when he was locked up in the
jail. Lack of privacy might have helped in keeping the family glued
together by making individual dependent on each other. They can fight
with each other and burn each other hearts, yet they would not break
away form their people on whom they emotionally dependent to an unusual
degree. It is often said that India is a 'nation of communities and
groups' rather than of individuals and citizens. There is a deep urge to
have a collective identity : Jats, Branmins, IITians etc. It would be
naive to give prescription for this problem if any. Societies do not
change overnight. They change rather slowly and changes are often
incremental. First of all, they would not seek a solution simply because
they would not see it as a problem according to their value system. As
an Indian grows in status, so does the number of his visitors. And he
cherish every moment of it. He might complain, after a fashion, that he
has to spend so much time in meetings and committees. But this complain
need not be taken seriously. An Indian enjoys few things more than being
able to surrounded by people among whom he can hold forth. What he can
not afford is to be himself. It would be naive to expect that changes
would come from inside. It can only be changed by some outside
influence. Industrialization and westernization have been changing our
society and one gets this strong feeling that it will adapt itself
accordingly. Just like in many other ways, Indian society has been
adapting to modernity. REFERENCES : [1] You think therefore I am, Vinay
Nagaswamy, The Hindu magazine, March 15, 2009 [2] '[Privacy perception
in India and
U.S.](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/afs/cs/Web/People/ponguru/tprc_2005_pk_lc_en.pdf)'
CMU - A study. [3] Right to Privacy, A. G. Noorani, EPW - 2008 [4]
Privacy and Secrecy, Andre Beteille, Essay collection, 'Ideology and
Social Science'. -- Dilawar

![](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2011/05/3794193585985230867-1448428345228948442.gif?w=1)

###### Related articles {.zemanta-related-title style="font-size:1em;"}

-   [My Thoughts On
    Privacy](http://everythingbutblack.wordpress.com/2013/02/18/my-thoughts-on-privacy/)
    (everythingbutblack.wordpress.com)
-   [Why Are Your Kids So
    Secretive?](http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/the-age-un-innocence/201301/why-are-your-kids-so-secretive)
    (psychologytoday.com)
-   [Behind The Privacy
    Fence](http://etcutliff.wordpress.com/2013/02/20/behind-the-privacy-fence/)
    (etcutliff.wordpress.com)
-   [What Teens Really Think About
    Privacy](http://www.radicalparenting.com/2013/02/18/what-teens-really-think-about-privacy/)
    (radicalparenting.com)

