~~~~ 
title: Birthday ..Just 23..
type: post
status: publish
id: 20
category: Uncategorized
~~~~

This is March 25, 2009. Today I started writing these memories.\
\
Though I write my diary, I am writing this on the blog. I may loose my
diary. There is a big danger for that mortal thing to be consumed by
something. These blogs I can preserve easily until unless holocaust does
not happen or I loose my memory completely.\
\
It would be nice today writing about all the 23 years I've lived. It
would be sensible to figure out if this living made any sense till now.\
\
I don't remember much about my childhood. Or perhaps there is nothing
much to remember. My childhood, mostly, was of a typical rural kid.
Waking up before the sunrise and sleeping just after the sunset. Mummy
tells me about my childhood though. Like I used to be quite alone. Never
played with the kids of my age. If guest would come to visit us, I'd sit
somewhere and watch them in surprise. Mingling with the older men was
the thing I did quite often. Their knowledge surprised me. And I got
this desire to grow up to be a cool old dude.\
\
Paper was scarce at my home since this was of no use. So did the pen.
Mummy could hardly read. Dad spends most of the time in the fields. No
time for him to blacken the paper. Anyway, there was a big register in
which Papa kept the accounts of the important dates, like at which date
the particular cow or buffalo suppose to give birth to a calf, and at
which date the bill from sugar mill came, and if someone asked for some
money or things, that was also noted down too. There were some books at
my home, mostly used by my father during his stunts in his schooldays.
In his school, as He recalls, He'd dump his schoolbag somewhere under
the bridge on the canal and go to fields to track down some wild birds
like titar with his friend. Most of his friends were from lower castes
(It was an terrible thing to do in those days). Today, back at my place
things are far better that they are here. He used to make animals out of
clay. Others say that He was quite an artist. Once he and his friends
stole the mitti (clay used to make pot) from the kumhaar (potter) and
made a tractor. Quite a big one. They would sit on it and pull it on the
roof. It had steerings and wheels. It could be steered using steering.
Everyone was surprised. Even the potter would not say anything. Once in
monsoon, in night, rain! and all gone! His grown up friends still
recalls that tractor was a remarkable incident in their life and regrets
that they should have salvage it in the night itself from the rain. He
studied till highschool. Failed in highscool miserable. Passed in only
one subject (37/100, 33 was the passing marks) out of six. I lost his
marksheet. He passed it in second attempt as He'd say, I am skeptical
though. My grandfather was quite literate given the time He lived in.
That is perhaps He let him go to the school. I used to have his
handwritten application to the Bank manager in which he requested him to
shut down the account. It contained Rs 33.50. There was not a big use of
account though that time as it does today. Gradpa was a very big
spendthrift. That pays off later. He bought some more lands and bought
my father his first tractor (Rs 85,000, Eicher ). Meanwhile my father
got married while he was in 11th standard. 19 year old, or perhaps 18.
Mummy was 16. My nanaji was quite a rich farmer. He used to have
hundreds of cows and a lot of lands. His had 2 sons. Bade mamaji did
graduation and did not do a job. After the education He couldn't do the
farming. This is the foremost reason why did farmers did not like their
children to be educated. Even when we were in the schools, some would
come a say, " Look! dont send them to the school too often, they become
useless for khetibaari. You should teach them how to work in the
fields." And my father listened to them. Working in the field was the
primary choices we were given. However, I dont know why, schooling were
never terminated or depreciated. Perhaps, my mother was hell bent. And
why woudn't Dad listen to a lady who the most beautiful lady in the
whole village (or perhaps in the world! mind you, check out my "Family
Album" in orkut). Anyway, later after highschool, we were not asked to
do works in the fields, though small small works were time consuming but
not laborious like staying on the field while irrigating it if Dad had
some other works. Suppling Diesel for the engine and lunch for the
workers. Bringing fodder from the fields for the cattles. Studying
engineering, was thing that could happen in the dreams those days. Pass
the intermediate and look out for some work or go to the nearest degree
college for UG and start working on the fields. Ultimately, You have to
be a farmer! Fortunately, it did not happen that way. :)\
\
I was quite smart in my childhood. I did learn alphabets and elementary
math way too fast. I used to write in the air or sand. I used to suffer
from unlimited imagination and so find very hard to concentrate on what
someone else had to say in the class. By someone I mean teacher, other
were not allowed to talk in the class. Indian society, at large is quite
oppressive. I was fortunate to have a teacher like Shri Shivprakash
Sharma. Every kid in the school liked him.\
\
In primary school, In which we studied, is in my village. A new building
of 2 rooms and a small office was just erected out. It looks really
nice. There was a library in which 257 books (all names were put down in
registers) were there. They were of all kind. By all kind means lit,
science, math and blah blah. I read all of them :-). That was the place,
I got all the inspiration and attitude needed to do somehing valuable.
Though it was a messed up school but I had a nice teacher, Shri
Shivprakash Sharma. Since then, I have seen great professors,
researches, persons.. but as a teacher none matches Him. Teachers and
mothers all we need to shine like a wonderful society/nation/human
beings.\
\
HOME, FAMILY AND PRIMARY SCHOOL\
When I joined the school, there was a urgent need for the clock since we
did not had any. I still counts how many clock a place have when I visit
it, childhood curiosity do not die! Dad wouldn't give a damn about not
having a clock. For him it was useless. Sun shines, go to fields. When
temperature in unbearable, come back. When birds starts chattering again
in evening, go to the fields. And of course everything ceased to exists
when sun went down. Mummy marked the ground on the floor. When sunlight
touches the spot it was time get the bath and to get ready... and school
chale hum... Later Mummy went to her mother's place and bought a clock
for Rs 75 (She also bought a lot of Parle-G and orange flavor toffees
:), more important than the watch ) . What a utter waste of money, my
father would say. But he didn't make it a big deal out of it since the
money came from my mother side. Or perhaps he also liked to see the
ticky tick in the home. My mother taught me how to see the time in the
watch. Perhaps that was all she could teach me. She studied till 4th
standard. She knew that time how to read. Now she seems to forget a lot
of it. She would say, "See, I am the most educated person, I made all of
my kids educated. One is Engineer, One is pharmacist (she couldn't
pronounce it properly, She'd say only B. Pharma.) and One is a M.Sc.
(she wouldn't sat Chemist. She does not know what it is anyway!). She
fast a lot and very religious kind of lady. Navratra, Karvachoth, every
thrusday, friday .. poornima, amavasya.. a lot of fasting. She loves
watching television. With us, walt disney. Pluto is her favorites. Silly
symphonies takes the second spot. Since the television was B/W (no
electricity for a colored one those days, these days ok! inverter would
do but TV is still not there. Dad does not like it and Doordarshan does
not air Walt Disney anymore.) Saas-Bahu serials are plenty on tv, that
is why none of bother to have a tv in home. She does not care anyway.
She is happy with the cows and their calves. total 14. All stupid!\
\
My gradma, unsurprisingly is total illiterate. Her views of the world
are hilarious, ridiculous, naive and at the same time very emotional.
She lived in total poverty. She is in her nervous nineties, or perhaps
might have crossed the century marks. In her mouth, the foundation of
her teeth are still secure. her teeth are sharp. All 32 are still
intact, not in the proper shape though. In the morning first thing she
would do is to curse the chattering birds. She would use all her
imagination to figure out all the antiques gaali to curse them. She
believes that these cattles, birds, dogs understands what a human say
but could not speak. She would ask to turn off the radio in the night so
that the RJ could sleep. She still wonders how much persons in the
television does not feel the heat while she is sweating. I explained
that to her though but she did not seem to be convinced. She does not
know what the difference between Rs 10, Rs 50 and Rs 100 note. She only
knows the coins. Rs 1, 2 and 5. More than that is beyond her very
imagination. Paper bills are big. In her prime time, she only seen aane.
Children were as fragile as a clay toy those days. 7 of her child took
away by death. Only my father and 3 daughters of her survived. Doctors
were scare. Today we have a doctor in our village, not a degree holder
but quite good. He can not treat cancer or heartattack, anyway nobody
get those things. Only headache, stomach related diseases, fever. You
can go to nearby town if situation id bad. Granny does not know what I
am doing. All she cares about that I should get married to beautiful
girl, more beautiful than my mother was. Life in her time deserves a new
blog. I'll write it later.\
\
My elder brother used to study at my mausaji place. And my younger
brother did not give a damn. I did not know that he is my eleder brither
whenever he'd come back. Since I was smart as I told u.. I could figure
out that is the missing sibling of our poor little family. He did not
like it there, and I did not like him when he permanently came back. He
was a damn bully. My yonger brother used to be constantly sick so He
wouldnt dare to touch him. Anything could have proved fatal to him. So I
was a only target he could have. A fat little boy at his mercy.\
\
He used to tell us wonderfull facts. Like "Apun is the strongest man in
the whole world, whoever names is Apun would grow up to as strong as
him" Then he declared himself Apun. My younger brother was so impressed
that he made a pact with him. Now i got two kids to handle.. One was my
bully brother and other was chidchida brother. Somehow they discovered a
formula to make potions which has the potential to convert them into the
allmighty beasts. After much deliberation, they allowed me to taste it,
afterall I was their brother and ofcourse Mummy was there so they didnt
make it a big deal. Anyway a sip wouldn't make me that strong. So they
did not see a threat in that. The taste was strange and I did not feel
anything. But somehow, After drinking that they become stronger. I knew
they did. They proved it on me.\
\
After this, they wouldn't do that for I'd start crying. They day was won
easily by tears. Anyway we were learning at schools and were gud at
learnign things. So my elder brother came up with a new fact. he had a
some kind of wood which had some unusual shape. He'd say, " See, if I
put it underground. Then after seven layers of cowdung over it in seven
years, it'd finally become a sparrow. Then I'd flow away and shit into
this hole. The shit will be golden." That was an impressive story. So we
did that. None of us did check the shit after 7 year anyway. So the
truthfulness of the fact can not be refuted.\
\
... to be continued....
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-7840845048172058112?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
