~~~~ 
title: We.. The Engineers.. :-)
type: post
status: publish
id: 17
category: Notes
~~~~

I came about to read about a wonderful engineer of 18th century.. a
british engineer named Isamard Kingdom Brunnel who designed great
western railways and other super blah blah things. In addition He used
to smoke 40 cigars a day and died by a stroke. Too much for a genius.
This blog has nothing to do with him or his's. From his accounts its
seems that in 18th centuries, engineers were seen as people who change
the world. Things have changed a lot since then, as Jack Ganssale points
out in his "The art of desiging embedded systems". Engineers work hard
till their ass starts sweating but think less (its where your underwear
plays more important role that AC in your workplace. Hey this could be
worth researching how the thermodynamics works at the interface of your
butt and chair cushion).\
A study by Tim DeMacro and Tim Lister showed that keeping other things
equal, a programmer with 6 months or one year or 10 year of experience
have same efficienty when it comes to writing codes. That is bit
alarming! We design a lot of complex systems but have less
understanding. Some company took benefits of this sheer dumbness (or
indifference) of engineers. Debuggers are most obvious among them. They
capitalize on this inefficient and easily avoided practices of
engineers.\
Gallager, in his speech at IIT B here, cracked jokes about this attitude
too. microsoft word is getting bigger and bigger every day and gives
more headache than ever before (thanks to TEX who saved the eyes of
millions). He was insisting that we, engineers should keep things simple
(if I get him right!). Even when the final outcome is complex, it can be
build upon by these simple blocks which would be easy to manage, modify
and debug.\
\
Most interesting thing about engineers is, they are omnipresent. There
is joke, "If you throw a stone in a street of bangalore, It will hit a
dog or an software engineer." They can be as young as 12 year to as old
as a dead person could be. Other professions generally keeps armatures
out (for better or worse i dont know), take doctors for instance. Is the
meaning of word engineer cheapened over the time? In 18th century they
were considered celebrities, "the architect of futures". Are we only
reduced to "B.Tech/B.E." today only? There were times when politicians
were considered in very high-esteem. During the Raj in India or take
other worldwide struggle for Democracy. Now, as Democracy has become
Damn-0-Crisis (the bad among the worst), there are politicians at every
streets, just like engineers in every fields. Engineer, sound glamorous,
Haan! Now politicians took away the meaning of trust, (Raju did the same
with Satyam). Are we destroying our own profession. There are engineers
who cant even implement Ohm law. Are We only reduced to doing some job?
Say, writing codes, programmer! Any idiot can write codes, any one can
play around with softwares to make something. What separates us from
hackers and amateurs? This I may find out later. Anyway, There are very
few words/concepts with are as misused/misunderstood as engineers; some
of them could be, "freedom of speech", "national interest", "laws and
rights", "politics", "democracy", "its not our culture (drinking in NOT
but beating girls IS)", "son of the soil (new addition)".. you are
welcome to extend the list.\
\
There are other examples too. Microsoft had to make patch for its
Internet Explorer in dec 2008. IE is not someting very new, still they
all screwed up. Take windows, you all are aware of this blue monster. If
you are not, use Linux then you will know how monstrous it is. Same is
with .doc Vs .tex.\
\
Still, I can say, We Indians, might not be good with the research but we
certainly are the best engineer in the world (please don't include the
BPO and call-centre). Perhaps, Its a bit hard statement. Wheather its
embedded technologies developed by DRDO, nuclear technologies from
DAE/BARC, not to mention ISRO achievements, they are all worldclass.
Hopefully one day, even quality will be judged as "indian class". It can
be defined as performance\*reliablity to cost ratio. Lets check it out
after 20 years or so!! too much for today.. I have to finish "SOUTHPARK
season 6").\
\
--\
Char2 lab (EE Annex) feb 06, 2009
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-1874055044350381187?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
