~~~~ 
title: The divide between North and South India
type: post
status: publish
id: 110
tag: North and south India
category: Curious cases
~~~~

a:link { } \

> **What you can rightly say about India, its opposite is also equally
> true.**

-- A teacher of Amartya Sen

> **"South India has counted for too little in the Indian Republic. This
> is a waste for India as well as an unfairness to south India, because
> the south has a superiority in certain important things—its relative
> lack of violence, its lack of anti-Muslim intolerance, its lack of
> indiscipline and delinquency in the universities; in its better
> educational standards, its better government, and its cleanliness; in
> its far lesser practice of corruption and its little taste for Hindu
> revivalism. If the English language is to be saved to India as a
> living language it is the south that will save it".**

 --Walter Crocker, 1966. An Australian diplomat in his biography of
Jawahar Lal

\

After a Harvard historian wrote a book on how North always developed
first and faster than South, [a new
area](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/North-South_divide) of research was
started. He based his thesis, as Harvard historian generally do, on the
nations of Atlantic world. India, who has the history of showing middle
finger to almost all of the social science thesis ever produced in West,
deservedly contradicts it. I can't think of any foreigner other than E.
P. Thompson who ever came close to understand India. Neither I can think
of any Westerner, who does not have an opinion about my motherland.

\

Even in pure statistical terms, south has wealth at least 55% higher
than North, Literacy rate is 79% compared to 59% of north and 79% houses
have electricity, compared to mere 49% of North. In my village, we got
poles and wires in 2003. After that, we generally gets 5-6 hours
electricity 6 days a weak.

\

I have spend 4 years of my life in Chennai. When we you meet new people
or visit new places, *similarity* and *difference* always catches your
imaginations. Well, in my case, since I was from a rural area, almost
everything caught my eyes. Now, it's been 8 years since I have started
living in cities. I spent a year in Delhi, and currently living in
Mumbai. I have never visited rural areas of Tamil or Marathi, neither I
know these languages.

\

Well before I read Outlook Magazine's "Deccan Rising" special issue,
there were things I could easily notice in Chennai. There are very less
chance that a woman will be manhandled in buses. In fact, one southern
State of India, Kerala can put many well developed countries to shame
when it comes to women. Public places are saner and sanguine. Chennai
Central Railway station, where I used to reserve my railway ticket and
board the train, is possibly the best railway station in India.
Everything seems to be working. From public telephone (which you will
never find working in Delhi) to automated coin changer machine,
everything was in order. You don't have to leave 2 hours early as you do
in Kolkata just to get to the railway station. I have never witnessed
the traffic jam, though I have heard of it. Even in that damn hot
whether, people are calm and polite.

\

The college where I used to study(or suppose to study) is located in
Maduravoyal – a suburban of Chennai. Just near to it, it had
[Banyan](http://www.thebanyan.org/)*–* a institutes which cares about
mentally challenged people. Now every state have some mental institutes.
Remarkable fact about it that it was started by two student who were
just out of their teens. This is the age when girls seem to worry and
discuss about boys. Now how many states can boast of  Vandana Gopikumar
and Vaishnavi Jaykumar. North had its golden time when it came to
compassion. Nanak was born on these lands – he started a sect known as
Sikhs. Now as my Grandma claimed that she had never seen a Sikh beggar
or a Sikh thief. Could you locate a parallel in world? It would be
impossible to find one if you add their hilarious Santa Banta jokes.
This is not the only case, I have personally visited Madras Medical
Mission when my room mate was having trouble breathing in Chennai. Beck
in Delhi, I have seen a ex-Army officer in tears in asking if he could
be the first one to get the money out of the ATM since his mother is in
emergency and hospital-staff not attending her till money is paid in
advance.

\

I am very fond of public libraries even though they are as rare as
public toilets in India. I do not go there everyday but I always take
them as the sign of good public intellectual health. Public library in
Chennai -which I visited was on mount-road was well kept. I used to
visit it after vising British Council Library. Now, we have great
libraries in North also. But consider how the Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library is being ruined or what they have done with Bhandarkar Research
Library in Pune. If marathi[destroys their
institute](http://beta.epw.in/newsItem/comment/191280/) in their own
names, Hindi will not shy away doing the same out of mental corruption.
On more subtle level, I have never witnessed such a combination of
*Modernity* and *Traditions*in north India. Tamil people, on one hand
are proud of their longest surviving culture and languages, on the
other, there are also the one who have produced some of the best
technocrats and few Nobel Laureates as well. In addition, most of the
great civil servant have always come from South.

\

Lets get to their media. My morning starts with The Hindu. In Mumbai we
get one day older edition, I still wait eagerly for it. Monday is best
morning when I get to read its Sunday Magazine. It is only newspaper in
India which understands science. Its has written extensively on Indian
culture, history and science. Political views of a newspaper can not be
free of accusations, we'll leave it part. Compare it's content with big
newspapers of North. Cultural shows of Chennai have always been very
lively and vibrant. December of Chennai is famous for its classical
dance and music shows.

\

The city is always at peace. Besides a small period of time when Hindi
chauvinism was forced onto them. Why they have to use a young language
called Hindi when they use one of the oldest one? Besides, they have
been quite generous to the arrogant Hindi-wallahs. It was really the
question of Hindi in 1900 which laid the idea of Pakistan in Muslim
League after they went ruthlessly behind Urdu. They tried to did the
same with others, but fortunately, we had balanced mind in cabinet.

\

Its not to say, we don't see the dirty dance of inhumane nature over
there. But the difference is huge. When I was in Delhi, I can tell you
for sure that in a single day cases of road rages on the street of outer
Delhi  simply surpasses all the cases in any southern state.

\

There are reasons for this difference. The main reason for their
unbroken traditions is that they lived on the peaceful places. North
India was always the one who faced the invaders and violence that
ensued. So if there is a lot of mistrust among them, its just natural.
South Indian have also seen foreigners, but no one can accuse them (say
Moplas Muslim) of being invaders or conquerors. They have seen people
form outside as traders and merchant.

\

Now the best chronicler of Modern India, Ram Guha has this to say
“**That the south of India is more advanced than the north is now part
of the conventional wisdom. As it happens, I am just about old enough to
recall a time when the terms 'Madrasi' and 'South of the Vindhyas'
denoted derision and scorn. The typical North Indian regarded the
typical South Indian as short, squat, black, effete—and vegetarian. But
now, those once proud people are voting with their feet to move south.
They come to write code in Bangalore's software companies, to labour on
construction sites in Hyderabad, to work in coffee plantations in Coorg,
or to do odds and ends in Chennai's film industry.”**It was almost
impossible to find a south Indian who is normal in pre-2000 north-Indian
movies.

\

> Now, the stereotype of the South Indian among Punjabis and Biharis is
> that he is intelligent, hardworking, entrepreneurial, and open-minded.
> And that he can very often be a she. And, most importantly, that if
> you study well and behave yourself, she or he can give you a job.

  \
Multilingualism is a very thing of South. They seem to know at least two
language. On the other hand, Hindi, Bangla, and Marathi people are
notoriously offensive to any other language save English. They resisted
Hindi when it was forced on them, but now learn it quite joyfully also.
I have seen many children of these Bhashawallah who can not read and
write their own mother tongue. Sathyam Cinemas, where I used to quench
my thirst of Movies shows movies in five languages. I have heard that
there is a movie theater in Bangalore which shows movies in six
languages (This have got to be a world record!). In NCR, I could count
only two. I have always believed, speaker of more than one language are
inclusive within.\
\
I will not claim that being better is in their genes. These people of
four southern states are, on the whole, less bigoted and more
forward-looking is a product of their environment. As Guha said, “**Over
hundreds of years, they have learnt to live with people speaking
different tongues or professing a different faith. At the same time,
they have also learnt to be less discriminatory among themselves. Women
in the south are less likely to be manhandled in a bus or train; they
are also more likely to practise law or medicine, or run a business.
This too has something to do with history and geography. Women's work is
more crucial to (and hence more greatly valued in) rice as compared to
wheat cultivation. Among some communities in south India, property was
inherited through the female line. And, with no Rajputs or Mughals
around as role models, there was little pressure to put women in
purdah.”**\

But who knows which way one will evolve. If my grandmother have not seen
any Sikh thief and beggar, I can safely claim that Akali Dal or Congress
in Punjab has been as corrupt as governments are in U.P. or Maharashtra.
If Guha finds that **In this part of India, history and mythology do not
demand of Hindu youths that they set off, trishul in hand, in search of
Christian priests or Muslim rickshaw-pullers,** we have seen rise of
fascism in Karnataka. As a student of history I can say in the history
of humanity there is no looser of winners. Greeks did not survive,
neither did Harappa and Mayan despite of their colossal resources and
capabilities. The successive government of Tamilnadu have been as
corrupt as any, the violence in Andra practiced with various degree by
Mining Mafia, Landlord and Keepers of Public Morality and Naxalites is
as sever as we have seen in Mumbai, Gujrat or Orrissa. Who knows, may be
one day, my grand-daughter will be blogging why Bihar is more prosperous
and peaceful and Tamilnadu.

--\
Dilawar

![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-3947507928275418899?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
