~~~~ 
title: Culture of Work
type: post
status: publish
id: 177
tag: culture of work
tag: perception of work
category: Indian Culture
category: Indian Society
~~~~

> We are becoming lazy people, especially with our hands and feet and
> often enough; intellectually lazy too.

 -- Pandit Nehru

> Boredom is the worst evil in Human life and work banishes three great
> evils : boredom, vice and poverty.

 -- Candide, Voltaire

> Whatever you do will be insignificant, but it is very important that
> you do it.

 -- Gandhi

Most of the farmers in my village keep farms in good shape and finish
their work on time. But they hardly show any admiration for their work,
at least in public. Farming consists a lot of manual work. There is a
indifference if not contempt for manual and menial work. Most of Indians
do it otherwise they can't make their ends meet.  They often say to
their children, ‘Only if you become some big-man then I’ll get 'mukti'
from all of this.' Such disregard for manual work varies from community
to community. We often heard people telling my father, ‘Why are you
working like a donkey! Go home and take rest. God takes care of
everyone!’. The contempt for manual work takes slightly different color
in urban Indian society. They show similar indifference and contempt
towards those who do such menial work. Here in IIT Bombay, once in a
while, an email appears from mess-counsel asking not to misbehave with
mess-workers otherwise students will be penalized. It is remarkable that
any worker who faces such uncivil behavior never protest in open,
especially when they are not organized. He is well aware of his place in
our hierarchical society. Once in a while [a news reports appears and
comments](http://articles.timesofindia.indiatimes.com/2010-11-01/uk/28243687_1_immigration-cap-indian-immigrant-uk)
on it from the people highlights these attitude. Such attitudes towards
manual work can be found in all societies where work is ranked and labor
is divided. Although these rankings and division are much more rigid and
elaborate in some societies than others. The practices and norms of
works changes, though not as much as one might desire, with changes in
technology, material resources, and in the size and density of the
population. Two hundred years ago, Henri de Saint-Simon, who was one of
the precursors of Socialism, believed that a new kind of society, which
he called industrial society, is emerging in Europe in which only those
who worked will be esteemed unlike in earlier societies in which work
was disdained and left to the social inferior. He also noted that all
work that was socially useful and productive would be equally esteemed.
Industrialization did bring about these changes to a large extent, but
this does not mean that all occupations, even though they are equally
important, are equally esteemed in even the most advanced industrial
society today. Indian attitude toward work differs significantly from
attitudes even in other Asian countries. An Indian anthropologist, while
in Japan, noticed in Osaka that police constables and taxi drivers wore
white gloves. He light-heartedly made fun of this to a young Japanese
anthropologist who was with him. She put him in his place very politely
but effectively. She said, ‘*In Japan people respect the work they do,
even if it is that of a policeman or a taxi-driver. In India, there is
respect only for the well-born and well-to-do; there is no respect for
useful work.*’ Indeed, Japan is perhaps the most cited example written
about to contrast lack of appetite for work among Indian. S. A. Sapre, a
workaholic who established Institute of Study of Work, commented that in
Japan not only individual but ‘even family members attach great
importance to the office work. If the husband is called for work on the
holiday, the young wife feels proud that her husband is indispensable to
the organization.’ ‘*Once a young executive*’, wrote Sapre, ‘*had to
work extra hours for a number of days on some important project*.’ When
company sent him to his home early subsequently on next few days to give
him some relief, ‘his mother advised him to go to the bar or come home
as usual, as neighbors started esquiring whether he had any problems at
work’. To his surprise he noted that even union understood the value of
work. ‘Workers in a factory located in Japan but owned by American went
on strike for a day. The next day they worked with redoubled energy and
made good the loss of production. The American manager was puzzled by
their strange behaviour. The workers told him that the strike was meant
to draw his attention to their grievances but they did not want
production to suffer.’ [2] Sapre believed that such enthusiasm and
respect for work among Japanese has its root in Buddhism even though
Japanese are not very religious minded people. In Buddhism, the function
of work is three-fold : (a) To enable a person to develop himself, (b)
to make him aware of the need to help and assist others and thus to
satisfy the social instinct. It is through the work a man bind himself
to society, and (c) to produce goods and services needed for a
meaningful existence. Human life needs to be organized around meaningful
work. Zen Buddhism has refined these ideas further. It holds that all
work is sacred, all tasks important: ‘If you have eaten your rice
porridge, you had better wash your bowl’ and ‘a day of no work is a day
of no food’. The influence of religion on a society can not be
exaggerated for it shapes and often directs the behavior of individuals.
In all society, allocation of work was strictly governed by certain
rules. Rules of caste, class, gender, creed and religion have always
played their part in such schemes. In India, however, it gave a
distinctive and unique character to work practices and norm. The idea of
'pollution and purity’ that had deep roots in religious belief and
practice degraded division of labour. While elsewhere, lowest type of
work might have been considered degrading or demeaning, in India, it was
also treated as ritually defiling. In medieval Europe a person belonging
to a superior estate might suffer derogation or loss of rank if he
habitually engaged in menial work. Loss of rank is nothing compared to
loss of caste that might follow in India from doing the wrong kind of
work. Such fear of loosing caste, metaphorically if not literally,
affects the choice of occupations among middle-class Indians more than
middle-class people elsewhere. V. S. Naipaul [wrote of an
incident](http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2002-02-05/news/27349922_1_darkness-glass-sir-vidia)
at Bombay custom. When his companion fainted and he asked for a glass of
water from a clerk who was with him; but instead of fetching water by
himself, a clerk spend 15 minutes looking for a chaprasi who was of
right status for this job. This concern of status among middle class is
amusing if it does cause so much of wastage of time and work. Things are
not done here because not only people with right skills are unavailable,
they are also not done because available person does not have the right
status; either it is too low or too high. It does hardly matter that
otherwise he is perfectly capable to do the task at hand. This concern
for status has deep roots in caste system. As happened in many
societies, a theory is discarded well before its practice is abandoned.
Caste has lost its theoretical foundation but its practice is still
current though it has weakened in many strata of societies and has
strengthened in some other, especially in politics. In the past, ranking
of work was done according to the 'pollution' it may cause. The stigma
of pollution that was attached to such work such as scavenging, tanning
and flaying cast a show over many kinds of manual and menial work.
Oil-pressing, distilling, laundering, fishing, and even ploughing the
land were considered as tainted in various degree. Attitude towards work
have changed but one must not discount the inertia of old-habit and
mental patterns. Manual work is rated lower than non-manual in all
societies although the disparities tend to be larger in agrarian than
industrialized society. The middle-class Indian contempt for manual and
menial work is legendary. Indian engineers are notorious for avoiding
any work which may blacken their hand. In IITB-WEL lab, I often see
students complaining about why they are forced to work with circuits on
bread-board when they simulate them on computers. There have been
moderation of disparities between manual and no-manual work. Indian
experience with its leather industries shows that technology can remove
stigma of pollution. There are many areas where technology is obscuring
the difference between manual and non-manual work. But can technology
alone change the pattern of mind? Technology can turn a manual work into
non-manual work, an unclean work into clean one, and a repetitive work
into no work at all; but it will be a mistake to assume that technology
alone can change how society discriminate between manual and non manual
work. Education changes pattern of mind more rapidly than anything else.
Modern education introduces secular rather than ritual criteria for
distinctions of rank among occupations. Some profession requires high
educational qualifications while others do not; the former enjoys the
greater esteem than latter. Some professions give higher remuneration
than others; many if not most will prefer to do such highly paid work
even if these professions were disdained in the past. Business and trade
are two such examples which were treated with contempt by hight caste
Hindus in the past, but now in huge demand among them [3]. A few decade
ago, the gap in manual and non-manual work was reinforced by the fact
that former were generally uneducated if not illiterate while the later
were educated. This is no longer true to some extant. As one of our
anthropologist puts it, '**as manual workers become literate and
educated, they are less likely to be overwhelmed by the thought that
their profession and life itself is polluting or defiling. This will
certainly not bring equal remuneration or equal esteem to all work; but
it will be something**'. End notes : [1] Secularization of work, Andre
Beteille [2] The joy of work, National Book Trust, S A Sapre [3] On
changing perception of business and trade, see '[India's New
Capitalist](http://www.opendemocracy.net/openindia/yogesh-joshi/book-review-new-capitalists-caste-business-and-industry-in-modern-nation)',
Harish Damodaran.
[[Interview](http://www.opendemocracy.net/openindia/yogesh-joshi/book-review-new-capitalists-caste-business-and-industry-in-modern-nation)]
-- Dilawar

![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-7033324821726991058?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
