~~~~ 
title: Debugging : A case for ncurses-based console 
type: post
status: publish
id: 722
tag: debugging with ncurses
tag: TUI
category: ncurses
~~~~

Where would you log your debug messages when you are designing an
algorithm? I tried various things. Used various libraries (apache's
log4cxx is very powerful) for logging and even used database
([sqlite3](http://sqlite.org "SQLite") is my all time favorite for this)
to store all data as well as debug messages. Problem with sqlite3 is
that one has to type a lot but it is a very worthy investment if one
needs to process a great deal of data later. Of course, one can write
test-routines in the code itself and later disable them altogether once
application is tested. This seems to be a standard practise. But many
times one has to look at the data by oneself and in such cases logging
is essential. One must follow a standard format while writing logging
messages. Readability is of great importance. What is the use of message
which are hard to read. Prettyprinting requires work and often increases
the size of code. But one has to do it, there is no escape. Apache
logging framework format is pretty good. One can even write logs to XML
file. Beware that XML is not easy to read by humans. Computers, on the
other hand, can process xml easily. If logs are too big, I'd suggest go
for either XML files or sqlite3 database. SOCI's soci library is a good
library in C++ for sqlite3. For medium or small debugging, writing to
simple text files or console is good enough. And one usually design his
algorithm in steps. Therefore one can concentrate logs generated by a
section of program. In C++, compiler macros are very useful. For
example, if I am testing functionA, then I write its debug messages
between `#ifdef DEBUG_FUNA   #endif` and let the compiler know if I
wants to activate or not. I wish to suggest something more. If you are a
big fan of terminal (no gui, no mouse, no problem) and have a look at
[ncurses](http://www.gnu.org/software/ncurses/ncurses.html "Ncurses")
library. It creates a [text based user
interface](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Text-based_user_interface "Text-based user interface")
and I have used it in two applications. To cut the long story short, let
me show you the screen-shot of how ncurses based screen can be split
into many section in which different section can be used for different
type of log messages.

[![2013-02-17-033243\_1366x768\_scrot](http://dilawarnotes.files.wordpress.com/2013/02/2013-02-17-033243_1366x768_scrot.png)](http://dilawarnotes.files.wordpress.com/2013/02/2013-02-17-033243_1366x768_scrot.png)

Even this is lame. Let me show you a video. First few seconds to this
video will show you the blindness caused by naive logging on the
console. Then we'll see the power of ncurses. You'll see two matrices,
we wish the left one must have rows which has only single 1. If this is
achieved, our algorithm is correct.
https://www.facebook.com/video/video.php?v=109918892526120&saved

###### Related articles {.zemanta-related-title style="font-size:1em;"}

-   [Processing XML
    files](http://dilawarnotes.wordpress.com/2013/01/20/processing-xml-files/)
    (dilawarnotes.wordpress.com)

