~~~~ 
title: Obituary : Prof. R. E. Belford
type: post
status: publish
id: 176
tag: IIT Bombay faculty
tag: Prof. R E Belford
category: About a person
category: IIT Bombay
~~~~

(Following obituary was sent to IITB community by director of IIT
Bombay. This is written by his colleagues) Prof. R. E. Bedford 1926 -
2012Prof. R. E. Bedford, Professor Emeritus at IIT Bombay, passed away
in Chennai on 25th June 2012, aged 86. He was a faculty member at IIT
Bombay from 1958 to 1986, and was its Acting Director and Director
during 1980-81. After completing his Ph.D. from the University of Madras
in 1955, he held a post-doctoral position at IIT Kharagpur before going
to the University of Illinois, USA as a Visiting Assistant Professor. 
He joined IIT Bombay as an Assistant Professor in its early days --
September 1958 -- and became full Profesoor in 1966.  He was Head,
Department of Electrical  Engineering in 1964-1966, and was the Acting
Director and then Director from August 1980 to December 1981.  He
retired from IIT Bombay in 1986, and was conferred the lifetime Emeritus
Professorship shortly therafter. Prof. Bedford was one of IIT Bombay's
most admired faculty members,  held in high esteem by students, faculty
and staff alike.  A specialist in the theory of electrical machines, he
laid the foundation for the country's pre-eminent group in this area at
IIT Bombay.  Prof Bedford had worked for his doctorate degree on the
theme of prediction of performance of electrical machines using concepts
of electromagnetic fields. Continuing   his work at IIT Bombay, he
published benchmark research papers on space-time harmonics and design
of machines. Many students worked under his guidance for doctorate
research. His book on electrical machines, co-authored with his
colleague in IIT Kharagpur, was a 'bible'  in machine theory in those
times. Over the years, Prof Bedford migrated, with ease, to other topics
like network synthesis and power electronics,  thus straddling both the
"heavy'" and "light" current domains -- as they were then known -- of
electrical engineering. As an academic administrator, he led the Senate
Committee, till today known as the Bedford Committee, which resulted in
the far-sighted academic re-structuring of IIT Bombay, which continues
till today.  He  served as Acting Director and then Director with
distinction for about 16 months in 1980-81. Professor Bedford was a true
scholar, pursuing knowledge for its own sake, and always interested in
new ideas not only from his own field of  specialization but other areas
as well.  He was well known for his  Socratic method of teaching, using
questioning and discussion to stimulate critical thinking. Students and
colleagues soon came to realize that his quizzical doubts of various
points of electrical engineering  indicated not a lack of understanding,
but rather the beginning of a  deeper probing. He thus trained a
generation of students and colleagues in non-dogmatic and open thinking,
not only about technical matters, but  about academic issues in
general.  He was one of a small band of influential faculty members in
the formative years of IIT Bombay who  created the ethos of an open
academic environment, which continues in  IIT Bombay till today.
Professor Bedford will be remembered by his colleagues and students at
IIT Bombay as the quintessential gentleman, informal, warm and
accessible, having a great sense of humour, and as a caring mentor for 
students and young colleagues. His informality carried over to his dress
style. Once at an important conference, his colleagues remember that one
of the captains of industry remarked, "What, Bedford, you're in shirt
sleeves!" To which Professor Bedford replied with his inimitable good 
humour, "If I may paraphrase Gandhiji, you are dressed enough for us
both!"  Professor Bedford also enjoyed many non-curricular activities.
He  was a puzzle solver par excellence, who routinely completed the
(then difficult) Times crossword before the 10:30 am class.  He will
also be fondly remembered for his portrayal of Professor Higgins trying
to  each circuit theory to a recalcitrant Eliza (played by Professor
Jimmy Isaac) in the IIT spoof version of My Fair Lady. The legacy that
Professor Bedford created during his years at IIT Bombay will live on in
many important ways. May his soul rest in peace. -- IIT Bombay [1] [A
student remembers](http://obvioustruths.blogspot.in/2012/06/r.html) [2]
I am still struggling to find out his full name. Rangaiah Emanuel
Bedford (courtesy, comment 1)
