~~~~ 
title: Joining electrical engineering department at IIT Bombay for post-graduation?
type: post
status: publish
id: 1093
category: IIT Bombay
~~~~

Still enjoying success in GATE? Well, it's a good time now to come out
of your shell and start preparing yourself for some engineering work
before your success do some permanent damage to you. GATE (or any
examination) tests theoretical knowledge and has little to do with
skills. I have had some classmates who could not even compile a program
and had great percentile in GATE. Mere theoretical knowledge is not a
replacement of real engineering skills. It is a truism that skills
rarely counts for anything when it comes to admissions on our technical
universities. But is it a good reason for not acquiring skills at all?
What I mean to say that GATE or JEE or any competitive examination test
only how fast you can do menial mental calculations. It has nothing to
do with creativity and skills which are of great importance in real
world for solving some real time problems. To draw an analogy, knowing
the theory of how to hit a ball in the game of cricket does not make
anyone a good batsman. Theory helps but it really takes practice to
master any skill.

Familiarize yourself with Linux. All labs runs on Linux server here.
Install some Linux distribution such as Ubuntu or Fedora on your
computer and practise some tutorials, especially related with terminal
and networking. How to login to other computers using 'ssh', how to
compile and run programs in Linux environment, etc. Some of it, you can
learn on the job during your stay in IIT Bombay but not everything can
be learned on job. You should not be doing much these days anyway expect
for finding out your classmates and comparing your rank with theirs,
right? Pick a general purpose language, it will serve you all of your
life. Programming language is a way to tell computer what to do and
everyone uses computer in engineering. I'd recommend Python. It is easy
to learn. It wouldn't hurt if you learn Latex as well. 

 

Those who are joining in Microelectronics and VLSI should brush up their
HDL skills. Control and computation people should learn Scilab. It would
also help if you brush up your analog and digital electronics.
Micro-electronics is all about MOS-FETs and other semiconductor devices.
More you know about them is better for you. First semester is going to
be hectic, I don't expect that you will find the time to learn any of
these skills during that time. And after first two semesters are over,
students gets into 'kya fart hai' mode and rarely do much in their
projects. They don't want to learn skills which takes much more time
than theory; and without skills little gets done in projects. The
vicious cycle is complete. 

 

There's nothing wrong being a nerd and been seen like one. Students
often ridicule those who show more than normal interests in their
studies. You should learn to take it into your stride and learn how to
ignore those loud and aggressive classmates who have much to say about
nothing. Unfortunately, there are just so many of them. You must make
sure before when you get out of IIT, you acquire minimum amount of
skills. Don't go out there with wrong fundamentals and little skills.
Real world is a big bad wolf. It does not pay you for your ability to
darken the correct bubble on ORS sheet, it pays you because you are
skilled enough to do something. Think about it. 

 

-- 

Dilawar
