~~~~ 
title: Indian Institute of Science..
type: post
status: publish
id: 22
category: Uncategorized
~~~~

(This blog were changed slightly after first comment to neutralize the
tone of this observation. Its a personal experience and can be labeled
as blah blah.. )\
\
I visited this institute in April 2009 for some official research
work... no no .. for some project work since the lab in my institute was
closed for some time .. actually I was fed-up being on the same campus
for a long time.\
\
Journey was a pathetic as it could be in a sleeper class. The only good
thing was that I was accompanied by a pretty girl who turns out to be a
very good listener with a very compatible sense of humour. So my mouth
was dry and her stomach was about to implode. She enjoyed more that I
did.\
\
I always kept this institute in very high regard especially its awesome
resilience with with it kept its soul with the research. I still have no
regret not to joining this institute but rather opt for IIT bombay for
PG. I am writing this blog from the campus of Institute of Mathematical
Sciences, Chennai which I'd love to join as Ph. D. in Theoretical
Physics. IISc, which has seen towering personalities, most self effacing
and selfless of men, some merely capable men as its directors has
maintained its glory notwithstanding the iron law of Indian institutes
which enjoys the short periods of glory depending on the director's
capabilities. It might have not produced Nobel laureates but it has done
much batter. It has created human resources over the time which has
transformed the Indian science and technical prowess in a way that none
of the other institute have done. Unlike IITs which are hell bent to
produce human resources for MNC's. The role of IITians on the indian
society deserve separate blog and a scholarship way beyong my
scholarship.. here I can only say.. In the land of western dominance
where white scholarship is only scholarship.. in a nation whose media is
obsessed with someone six pack abs or bikini babes (or to worse Raj
Thackeray or local stenographic nit-pickings)... in a society in which
intelligence, on the various level defined by the marks - ranks- money
in Jobs - fame - ... in a nation with over 1 billion people who looks
for someone with white skin to analyse even her own personal affairs...
in a nation with pathetically indifferent young generation who even does
not care to vote (remember 43% Mumbai voted even after the terror attack
after which elites were seems to be raging for election. Might have seen
TOI, in which one celebraty was saying ,"Oh! I vote every year." Every
year.. oh! for the sake of democracy!) ) .. anything could make sense.
And if New York Times and Wall Street journal says that its the reverse
brain drain now, then it has to be right.\
\
Anyway IISc, The atmosphere was as pleasing as the sights of its
buildings. All the buildings style were remarkable homogeneous.. as
homogeneous as the thinking of the whole batch in IIT. There are very
few in IITs which think otherwise, and more the fame and sense of
identity gripping the already mess-up IITian, there are very little hope
that the next generation of the IITians are going to think otherwise.
None a single IITian has ever joined army to serve (might be there one
or two, I'd be more than humbled to know that) his/her own India.
However, there are some remarkable examples came out of these campuses
in early days. I don't know how many of them from this generation are
going to add on to this rather that enjoying the other's established
identity.\
\
I don't understand why I get so bitter when it comes to IIT's. Anyway I
am a alumni of this institute but I don't like to be known as IITian (or
perhaps, I don't deserve this identity).\
\
On one aspects, IISc failed miserably is there is lack of humanities and
social sciences on her campus. I wish it turns out to be a great
institute and like TIFR, more and more enlightened young people like to
join it.\
\
For me, I am planning to stay at IMSc for doctorate (if I could control
my not-so-sensible tounge in interview). Here I was chatting with a
professors and he passed a comment, "Look son! 5 year is not a small
time, After 5 year no-body is going to give you a job after doing
physics and more importantly you will be ostracised by the very people
who praises your logo (IIT on my T-shirt) you are having on your back.
Thought it through. Physics does not guarantee success to anyone no
matter how smart or intelligent. Just talk to the students here before
making a dedication." I just nodded and smiled back then He took his
coffee cup and wished me good-luck for the interview.\
\
--\
dilawar\
IMSc campus\
from Gaurav office\
CIT campus, Taramani Chennai\
1701 hrs, May 17, 2009
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-3715764493672835764?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
