~~~~ 
title: How much cheating students do in their assignments? Some data from Electrical Department, IIT Bombay, India
type: post
status: publish
id: 1018
category: IIT Bombay
~~~~

Cheating is quite prevalent in Indian universities and IITs are no
exception but they are very reluctant to admit it in open. Apparently it
brings bad name to the institute. In this note, I dont want to discuss
the social issues as I have [done is somewhere
else](http://dilawarrajput.wordpress.com/2012/12/12/academic-dishonesty/).
As a teaching assistant, I wrote [an
application](https://github.com/dilawar/sniffer) which sniff codes
submitted by students. And here is some data. Students were aware, more
or less, that such tool exists. Each node is an student and an edge
shows the cheating was done between two students in coding. Thickness of
the edge is amount of cpopying done. Red edges is a definate copy.
[![copy\_all](http://dilawarnotes.files.wordpress.com/2012/03/copy_all.png)](http://dilawarnotes.files.wordpress.com/2012/03/copy_all.png)
This picuture is really bad. I have removed "small copying" from the
code. If I include that too, this is how it looks.
[![detailed](http://dilawarnotes.files.wordpress.com/2012/03/detailed.png)](http://dilawarnotes.files.wordpress.com/2012/03/detailed.png)
The light blue-edges are small matching. I have verified them manually,
and all I can say, that this is copying, although it would be extremely
hard to prove it. I reported these cases to my instructor. Many of them
were called and given a warning, some literally cried and plead
innoccence. They were treated lightly. Crying is perhaps the best
psychological defence, it put the instructor on the back foot. Many
others resorted to playing word-games and turning tables on me by asking
that similarity in code is due to similarity in appraoch. But that does
not explain by indentation and comments were same. The instructor later
told me that these guys, those who play word-games, are very active in
student organisation. Nonetheless, once class realised that there is a
computer program which checks copy cases, it reduces drastically.

[![copy1](http://dilawarnotes.files.wordpress.com/2013/12/copy1.png)](http://dilawarnotes.files.wordpress.com/2013/12/copy1.png)

This somewhat "ugly" picutre in different format from a different
assignment. No of edge tells how many files are copied between two
students. This does not show total no of students in class.
[![summary](http://dilawarnotes.files.wordpress.com/2013/12/summary.png)](http://dilawarnotes.files.wordpress.com/2013/12/summary.png)

###### Related articles

-   [Asian Immigrants and What No One Mentions
    Aloud](http://educationrealist.wordpress.com/2013/10/08/asian-immigrants-and-what-no-one-mentions-aloud/)
    (educationrealist.wordpress.com)

