~~~~ 
title: Academic dishonesty
type: post
status: publish
id: 394
tag: Academic dishonesty
tag: cheating in assignments
category: IIT Bombay
category: Indian Culture
~~~~

I have been a teaching assistant in IIT Bombay since 2007. In otherwise
a continuous stint, there was a gap of one year when I worked in
industry after completing my masters. I prefer programming and lab
related courses. I take a perverse interest in figuring out which
student has copied his/her assignment. There have been many instances of
cheating in those courses; and my intention is to comment on it. One of
our professors who does not mince words in classroom and is reputed to
be a very hard-working person (not just by local standards), remarked
once in the classroom that when someone cheats, he is essentially saying
that he is incompetent. 'Why would anyone cheat or import if he can do
it by himself', he wondered. He went on to say that this applies to
individuals as well as to nations. This is definitely true in its own
context. I know some students who were technically weak but did not
cheat and those who were sharp and technically sound but did not mind
cheating when they got half a chance. During my M. Tech., I was close to
a group of undergraduates. I found them to be sharp and clever; one of
them was perhaps brilliant. They were usually well-behaved, even in
their private spaces. Although their behavior on 'profile-reading' was
like that of a drunkard in my village during Holi. I remember going to
their hostel once and finding out that one of them calling another one
'chutiya' while others were looking at him with amusement. It turned out
that in a lab examination, they all were in the corner cheating and the
'chutiya' among them refused to be a part of this activity. That an
individual refusing to be a part of his peer group activity, which he
thought to be unethical, is rare in our style of society. It is also
natural that a group ridicules a member of it who does not take part in
its activities, evil or benign. But one expects a group of students to
be more tolerant of a 'black sheep'. No doubt that cheating is
beneficial in short run and there are certain temptations, with some
reason, to indulge in it. But we can not ignore the fact that we live in
a society which tolerates such dishonesty to a great extent. All
individual pursue their interest, not always consciously, but it is a
mistake to believe that all of them pursue their interests at any cost
at most of the time. What stands out is the gall of this group to
contemptuously ridicule one of their member who did not pursue those
benefits at the cost of his dignity. How cheating is perceived and how
it is defined varies individual to individual . What seems to be a case
of cheating to some may not look like a case of cheating at all to many
others. Still, it is possible for an academic community to define what
constitute as unethical practice and to expect from its members to honor
the code. The best way to maintain such standards is internal censure.
When this internal censure weakens, dishonesty increases. Copy and paste
in seminar reports submitted by our students are rampant and it is
tolerated to great extent. Last year in a panel discussion 'what is
research' a professor remarked, 'there have been cases of plagiarism in
Ph. D. thesis.' It was also tolerated because they didn't 'want to
appear on the front page of Times of India.' This is odd; to admit at
one hand that they can not maintain some basic ethical standards for
fears real or imagined and to demand more autonomy on the other. Unless
pointed out in great clarity, many of students caught cheating would not
like to see it academic dishonesty; partly due to ignorance and partly
to avoid accusation of being corrupt. Who likes to see himself a moral
cripple? Therefore they devise ingenuous arguments in their defense. I
do not know many supporting it in public without giving one reason or
another. 'Everyone does it' is one of such reason they usually give to
their peers. It will not be hard to prove that not everyone, or even
most of the people, in this society are cheater. But proving a fact is
one thing and caught in a feeling is another. In a society where
everyday someone accuses everyone else of some wrongdoing, it is not all
very unnatural for people to believe that being so must be the natural
state of their society. I know at least one Teaching Assistant who was
making a case to the instructor, who was also her guide, in favor of
such students. She argued that usually there is a 'lack of time' to
complete these assignments therefore it is natural for these people to
'do-what-they-have-done'. I suspect that there would be many others with
similar opinions. Her guide was not convinced about it but he was of
view that punishment should not be very severe for 'all in the IIT do
it'. There is definitely some element of truth in the insinuation that
'all of them do it' but I also suspect that Indian mind is prone to
compare everything with the worst. Lack of time can hardly be  an
acceptable argument. That particular instructor has mentioned may times
in the classroom that if someone is having difficulty in assignments, he
should approach him. Besides why do they not submit a partial
assignment? There is a very thin line between 'discussing with friends'
and cheating and this line is often transgressed. This need not be the
case, but this is the usual experience. The 'lack of time' argument for
cheating is no more convincing that the argument our academicians often
put forward for not honoring their teaching commitments i.e. they have
to spend a lot of time in meetings and committees. And they have their
strikes to attend too. As far as students are considered, this reason
sits oddly with my personal experiences. These time-starved students
spend an unusual amount of their time in being social butterfly. I do
not remember many times when I did not see a hostel room either empty or
occupied by more than one person chatting, watching movies,
chit-chatting with unusual amount of laughter. Doing individual
assignments is a solitary activity. Spending time in solitude does not
come naturally to an Indian who is extremely gregarious by nature.
Temptation to get as many marks as possible by fair of foul means aside,
there is perhaps a conviction -- consolidated by past experiences and
with some reason -- that they can get away with it; especially when they
belong to a majority. This is perhaps the reason a cheater usually start
his case by saying 'everyone does it' and try to pull the weight of
numbers on his side. In a society where constitutional morality is low
and foundation of institutes are weak, 'rule of number' often prevails
over 'rule of law'.  As of the temptation of cheating, promotion of
brutal competition has its own cost for it can create a society which is
callous and self-serving. In such a society, skills such as leadership,
gardening, art, empathy, honesty, and desire to help each other etc.
counts for little. [see, The rise of meritocracy, Micheal Young] Should
universities or any institutes punish these family members? There can be
many arguments for it (and some against it). It is naive to believe that
those who are doing it are merely a 'victim of system or society' or
doing it due to 'lack or time'; they know what they are doing and they
seem to know it very well. They are doing it to fetch rewards at the
cost of their profession and institute, and perhaps at the cost of their
colleagues too. Sympathy for young aside, they are greatly tolerated by
faculty because they themselves have breathed the same air which their
students are breathing now. Even if we accept that these students are
merely acting under one illusion or other, there is a limit to which a
university should tolerate them. These students may not care for their
own reputation and dignity, but when the dirty linen comes out in public
it irreparably damage the reputation and dignity of the institute. Their
will be a demand for outside censure; and it would be hard to deny even
by those who are all for academic autonomy. An academic community must
convince itself of the importance of a strong internal censor. And if
the  academic community is inwardly convinced that this is not a serious
issue then such an institute must have an evil fate. Lack of competence
may not force people to cheat, but those who cheat religiously not only
have parasitic characters, they are often very incompetent people. No
institute can survive, let alone flourish, without a competent and
dignified academic community which does not live up to even basic
academic standards and ethics. END NOTES : [[1] : Prof. H Narayanan on
personal
ethics](http://www.scribd.com/doc/116599290/Prof-H-Narayanan-on-personal-ethics "View Prof. H Narayanan on personal ethics on Scribd")[2]
Stuyvesant Students Describe the How and the Why of Cheating, A news
report. [The New York Times, Sep 25,
2012](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/26/education/stuyvesant-high-school-students-describe-rationale-for-cheating.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0).
-- Dilawar

###### Related articles {.zemanta-related-title style="font-size:1em;"}

-   [Life on a campus : IIT
    Bombay](http://dilawarrajput.wordpress.com/2012/05/19/life-on-a-campus-iit-bombay/)
    (dilawarrajput.wordpress.com)
-   [The culture of
    cheating](http://acculturated.com/2012/10/01/the-culture-of-cheating/)
-   [RSA Animate: The Truth About
    Dishonesty](http://lugenfamilyoffice.com/2012/11/24/rsa-animate-the-truth-about-dishonesty/)
    (lugenfamilyoffice.com)

