---
layout: page
title: Usage
comments: true
repository_url: http://github.com/dilawar/pywordpress
---

First you need to create a configuration file `~/.config/twordpress/config`.  If
you choose to keep this file at some other location, you have to pass its path
after `--config` option e.g. `twordpress --config ~/.twordpressrc
other_command`. It looks like the following. 

{% highlight bash %}
[blog0]
name=Dilawar's Blog
url=dilawarrajput.wordpress.com
user=dilawars
password=password1
[blog1]
name=Dilawar's Notes
url=dilawarnotes.wordpress.com
user=dilawars
password=blah
{% endhighlight %}

Let's assume that config file is at default location. 

## Proxy support 

Proxy support is added recently to python-wordpress-xmlrcp. It reads environment
variable http_proxy. If you are behind proxied network, then export
`http_proxy=proxy.something.net:1212` in your bash. And we are good to go.

## Fetch posts

Following commands fetches post:

~~~
twordpress --blog 1 --fetch all
twordpress --blog 0 --fetch "Python is awesome"
twordpress
~~~

First command will download all posts and pages from blog1. And second will
download all posts which matches the given query from blog0. Third command will
download most recent entries from default blog (blog0). Currently it does not
download media.

Each post gets its own directory and two files conetent.md and content.html are
created. Edit markdown file and run the following command to update the post.

## Updating post

Following command update the blog.

~~~
$twordpress --blog 0 --update path_to_new_content.md
~~~

## Create new post

This command post a new post:

~~~
$twordpress --blog 1 --new new_blog.md
~~~

The new blog is written in markdown format but a meta-data has to be prefixed.
This is how your blog file should look like.:

~~~
---
title: This is title of my awesome post
status: publish
tags: [some awesome tag, tag2]
categories: [catA, some_category]
---

Here is content of blog in markdown format.

Too much has already been written. This ends my blog.

~~~~
