~~~~ 
title: God damn it!
type: post
status: publish
id: 6
category: Uncategorized
~~~~

A question is cropped up!\
\
Is that due to pride and vanity that I do not believe in the existence
of an omnipresent, omnipotent, omniscient God? Though it doesn't make
any sense whatever i say but these days as people have started taken me
a little bit seriously, I should make my stand clear. This question is,
I suppose, is inclined to conclude from the brief acquaintanceship they
had with me, that it was too much on my part to deny the very existence
of God and that I am suffering from the vanity and my mind is polluted
by success (as some/most of the people believe that getting some fucking
rank in some sort of competition is success.).\
\
I deny the very sort of almighty God existence. I’ll advance my
arguments later on. Here, I want to admit that it not vanity that has
actuated my dis-belief and made me adopt the doctrine of atheism. Why
should I have the vanity, I am not a super-being, supreme, neither a
rival nor an incarnation. I must disprove this allegation. My atheism is
not old. I started disbelieving in God and abhorring religion when I was
obscure young man, sort of a “world class looser”, on which his
classmates used to pass comments like rural-bumpkin, whose existence was
not even noticed by the beggars on railway platform. Whose ability was
even doubted by his mother, his father and his brothers ( I don't have a
sister.. :-( ). I have never been a studious or laborious kind but
committed towards my dreams. My kind of sophomore can not cherish any
kind of sort of undue pride which may lead him to atheism. Though
favorite of my engineering Math and engineering drawing teachers, I was
always disliked and hated by other teachers. In my dept, the highest
qualified and most experienced teacher, Prof. Dr. R. Thirumalai told me
in transducer lab, ‘You could be bad, but your are the worst." A student
who can not utter a single English sentence that time, though I always
take pride my intermediate marks in Literature Hindi but hardly it could
be the matter of pride outside my intermediate school, can not suffer
from vanity especially in India whether your english is more important
than your math or physics . I was rather a boy with a shy nature, who
had certain pessimistic dispositions about his future career. And those
days I was not a perfect atheist. My mother, under whose influence I was
brought up used to fast almost 3 days in a week and everyday offers
prayer. I was the only child in my village who, since the age of 4 till
he passed 12th standard that is the age of 15 and a half, used to wake
up in morning and after taking bath ( believe me it didn't matter if it
was June or December, or I was fine or sick.), used to offer prayers in
near by temple. That is also a irony, people in my village ascribe my
success to my childhood worship and me, after developing total atheism
got some sort of THING which most of the people call success. So when
the seed of atheism is sown? it was a article that moved me highly. I
didn’t have any argument to oppose his arguments. Then I think I should
study. I began to study. After the improvement in my English, I started
enjoying philosophy, more then the transducers and classical feedback
control theory about which my room mate used to call me “control man”.\
\
I believe (till now) that when you don’t have direct logic, then only
you should turn to philosophy. Avoid philosophy as long as possible.
There is very high danger that you might pick up very wrong philosophy
depending on your logical abilities and your learning capabilities from
observations. Don’t look for philosophy every time until the temptation
to feel something is more than to know it. It is highly dangerous.
Philosophy, as I believe, is the result of the weakness of human logical
nature. There is almost every kind of philosophy present, confronting
each other. You can justify any cause, any action, any any thing. When
our ancestors have the leisure enough to try to solve the mystery of
this world, its why and how, they were lacking direct proof, hence
philosophy was born. Over the time it ossified into human mind as
instincts and prejuidices and entrenched there. Though there are wide
differences in the fundamentals of philosophies, even in a single
hemisphere, just like religions, people are stick to them. They know
both of them have nothing to offer other than a false sense of soothing
nature, empathy, and above all and unfortunately, a belief to condone
your wrongdoings invoking philosophy and religion. \
\
Before going to argue about God, lets talk about religions which I
dislike the most after Himmesh Reshamiya nasal singing. Well, we all
know that the intentions of all religions are fair but the way they are
executed have created the havoc around the globe. In India, take Gujrat
pogroms, of internationally, say conflict in Somaliya, Chad, Rwanda are
just a name of few. I believe that just to control the ordinary people
from doing misadventures or PAAP they were made to fear the concept of
God whose doctrine were set by religions. Nice concept, but
unfortunately, it gives the power in some hands like churchs, Mosques,
Temples, Akal Takht etc. To keep the power intact of privileged one
rules were modified, and being modified. And we are so blind!\
\
My previous faith underwent a remarkable change. Now my religion is
Agnostic, I need a reason to believe. No more blind faith. The romance
with violent faith were cut sort replaced by soothing Libertinism.
Realism is my cult now. That what the people are calling vanity. The
most important things in life are the clear conceptions of the ideals
about which you would like to confront the whole world. After joining
IIT, I got a very pleasing opportunity to study the various philosophies
of various thinkers like Marx, Lenin, Trotsky, Derrida, Kristera, Lacan,
Vivekanada, Premchand, Oskar Wilde…. Most of them were atheist. I
studied Ramanujam, who in the later part of his life accepted that he
did not believe in the existence of God. Dirac, on of my favorite
physician was also agnostic/atheist. By the starting of 2006, I have
convinced myself as to the baseless-ness of the theory that an almighty
God has an existence creating, guiding, and controlling the universe. I
have given out the very disbelief of mine, now I am a pronounced
atheist. Religion is a very bad thing, it should leave unconditionally.
Later we may miss it but in its current form, it is destroying the
unity, debilitating the humanity.\
\
\
Now, let me put my argument. Judgement is already well too known so I’ll
try not to invoke philosophy here, only logic, otherwise you may say,
“if you want to prove something wrong you will prove it anyhow with all
the philosophies around.”\
\
A Hindu might be expecting to reborn like a king or like a Prime
Minister ( of course not like Manmohan Singh), a Muslim or a Christian
might dream of luxuries to be enjoyed in paradise and the rewards for
his suffering and scarifies -I do not have any idea about other
religions ideologies so let me restrict myself within these boundaries.
That would be enough- What am I to expect? After my last breath that
will be my last moment, to be more precise, my soul as interpreted in
metaphysical terminology shall all be finished there. A life of little
bit of struggle, little bit of success, some tiny moments of happiness,
and some wonderful memories to cherish, with no magnificent end shall in
itself be a reward, if I have the courage, the valour to take it like
that. Given the circumstances, My belief in God would have made my life
easier, my burden lighter, and my disbelief in him would turn all the
circumstances too rough, at least there would be somebody on Who I can
put all the blame and walk away happily without hurting myself in
anyway. But I don’t want the help of any intoxication to meet my fate. I
don’t want my instincts to overpower my reasons. I am a realist and I am
trying my best to perfect myself in that way. Though “I am whatever you
say I am” for you but for me, I am a realist or trying to be one. I have
not always been successful in accomplishing these ends. “But man duty to
try and endeavour, success depends upon circumstances and environments,”
golden words of Bhagat Singh.\
\
There is an almighty, omnipotent and omnipresent God, who created this
universe, please let me know why he created this universe? This world of
woes and miseries, eternal combination of torture, murders, numberless
tradegies: Not a single soul is perfectly satisfied. Don’t say its His
law.If he is bound by any law, he is not omnipotent. He is just like you
and me, another slave like ourselves. I am highly disillusioned that how
could it be possible if God exists there is lot of injustice prevailing.
Oh, don’t say He enjoys it. George W Bush is enjoying things in Iraq,
Nero burnt down one Rome and to his enjoyment killed limited number of
people, watch the movie “Gladiator”, see what people did for enjoyment.
Do I need to write about Aurangjzeb and Chanjezkhan. Pages have been
blacked with invectives diatribes condemning Nero, the tyrant, the
heartless, the wicked. One Changezkhan killed a few thousands of people
to seek pleasure in it and I abhor his very name. Then How will you
justify your almighty, an eternal Nero, creating tragedies every second
surpassing Changez every moment. Why did he create this world- a
veritable hell, a place of constant and bitter unrest? Why did he create
Man when he has all the power NOT doing so? Just to enjoy his tragedies.
How mean and heartless could He be? Ok justice will prevail at last,
that the innocent gets the justice at last! Would you forgive me if I
dare to inflict wounds on your body and later try to put ointment on
it.\
\
My room mates used to warn me, don’t say bad words about God, He will
hit you hard. Does your God seek vengeance? Oh! Plz don’t say yes. Then
is worse then some the human beings. And if he just don’t care what you
are doing, how much sense does it make to believe in someone who don’t
even exists in your world. \
\
Millions has died in Wars across the globe and still dying in the name
of war against terror in Iraq, in tha name religion and caste as ethical
cleansing in Somaliya, Rwanda, Kashmir; in the name of revolution by
LTTE, Naxals, Bodo, and a lot of others. Hardly a second is passed in
which a innocent soul is NOT tortures, murdered, devastated by means of
the most inhuman ways. Why did He create such an animal, just to enjoy
HIS art. What kind of asshole would He be Who enjoy tragedies. There are
lot of pleasing things to enjoy, what could be more enjoying watching
every soul prosper to its full extent enjoying innocently the gifts of
nature. \
\
You Mohammadans and Christians, I ask you what is your answer for the
above mentioned questions. You don’t believe in previous birth so you
cannot advance the argument of previous misdoings, like Hindus, as a
reason of these sufferings. I ask you, why did your omnipotent God take
6 days to create this world and each day to say ‘all was well”? Call him
today, you don’t have balance, use my mobile, show him the past history.
Make him study the present and lets see if He dares to say – “All is
Well”.\
\
From the dungeons of prisons, from the stores of starvation consuming
millions upon millions of human beings in slums and huts, from the
exploited labourers, from the views of farmers committing suicide,
patiently or say apathetically watching the procedure of their blood is
being sucked by the capitalist vampires, and the utter wastage of human
energy that makes my common sense shiver with horror, let Him see all of
this and let him say, “All is well”. Why and wherefore? You are silent.
Alright then I proceed.\
\
Well, You Hindus, you say all the present sufferers belong to the class
of previous birth. Good, and present oppressors were saintly people in
their previous birth. In “Godan”, Premchand also criticize this issue.
Let me admit that your ancestor were very shrewd people, they tried out
every possible option to make you victim of their conformity, hammered
down all the efforts of reason and disbeliefs. If in your previous birth
you were offenders, what kind of punishment God inflicted on us. The
punishment must me reformative so one can return back to the society as
most of the competent and peace-loving citizen. Pain and suffering for
the misdoings can be Jungle law, it can’t be the Law of God. Don’t quote
you Purans, I have no scope of touching your methodologies. The greatest
sin in this world is being poor. It’s a punishment. It is the root of
all sin and misdoings. I ask you how far would you appreciate a jurist,
a criminologist or a legislature who propose such measure of punishment
which shall inevitably force men to commit more offences? Had not your
God thought about it. Why doesn’t He remove all the poverty and famine
from this world? Why don’t He change the mind of Warlords? Why does not
your omnipresent and omnipotent God stop every human beings from
committing any sin or offence? Not to mention the caste atrocities, just
somebody is born in a certain strata of society how much disrespect one
is put under again and again. He is hated and shunned by his fellow
human beings who think themselves to be superior having been born in,
say, a higher caste. His ignorance, his poverty, his broken self-esteem
and the treatment meted out to him shall hardened his heart toward the
society. Suppose he commits the sin. Who is responsible, the God who
made him born in such a caste, he or the learned one of the society.
These theories are the inventions of the privileged ones to justify
their usurp powers, riches and superiority by the help of these
theories. \
\
Let your almighty bring the order in this world, if he does so I’ll
believe in his existence. I don’t feel him in any way. The philosophy of
His existence is just like the philosophy of existence of ghosts and
evils though much advanced. There is no logic, all philosophies. As
Schrodinger have shown that you can not be certain about the present
state then simply you can not determine the future in any way. There is
no fate, no luck, all is governed by the rules of nature. Rule hidden to
be explored, crying so somebody can pay heed to them. Wasting time on
philosophy makes no sense to me these days. Philosophy is good when you
don’t have a direct logic but beware not to pick up something very
wrong, just like we have chosen to believe in God and religion without
any logic. I appreciate the intention behind these philosophies but
intentions were taken aback. Your God, Is he enjoying all the woes of
human race? A Changez, A Nero, Down with Him.\
\
I am trying hard to overcome this word "GOD" illusion. Sporadically, i
hurt myself whenever i utter this word " Oh! God" . it shows the
weakness of me, that my instints has overthrown my reasons, my belief.
But i am trying my best and one day i might say, "Yes, I am a perfect
agnostic." Wish me all the very best. I respect what you believe, please
do the same with me. If you want to prove I am wrong. Please advance
your logical argument. I'll be highly grateful to you. :-)\
\
Thanks...
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-6942494769094182979?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
