~~~~ 
title: Primary School Nichalpur
type: post
status: publish
id: 62
tag: Nichalpur
category: Village Life
~~~~

[![](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2010/03/img_00341.jpg?w=300)](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2010/03/img_00341.jpg)
\
[Nichalpur](http://wikimapia.org/#lat=29.1701497&lon=78.6208248&z=14&l=0&m=s&v=9&show=/11198798/Nichalpur-Village)
is a small village. It has a primary school. All of the nearby three
villages had only one school that time. Just like everyone else in my
village, from class 1 to class 5, I did my primary schooling there.\
\
COME, GET A DOB :\
\
'When was I born?', I did not know till I was 21. My mother could tell
me that I was born on the day of *Holi*. The day was Tuesday and it was
evening and a '*puja*' was being performed. Thanks to K*undli Pro,*I was
able to locate my time of birth on the time-line. It was March 25, 1986,
Tuesday, Shukla Paksha Purnima i.e. Holi. So I share my birthday with
that crazy [monkey-god
Hanuman](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iNH1J3o6rTw).\
\
I was put in the school early for various reasons. First and foremost
one that we had a school in village. My mother says that I used to write
something in air using my fingers well before I could speak and they
took it as a sign of unusual desire to write. Besides, basic schooling
is considered must for future-farmers by farmers for one must be able to
do basic computations in market. But the true benefit of schooling is on
the day of marriage interview when family member of would-be-bride come
and ask the baffling question "*Sade panch main se pone char
ghataiye"*(Subtract 3.45 from 5.50). If you can do this, you are married
else you have got to own a lot of land. And if somehow you are able to
pass High-school then a scooter is guaranteed in dowry, much better that
a cycle and radio people used to get in older days. Those days, when
someone was able to get these gifts of radio and bicycle in marriage,
people from nearby villages would come, see and comment, 'really big
marriage!'  Opportunity cost of not going to school was way too much.
Therefore my aunt took me to primary school and a problem cropped up.\
\
The rule book said that below 4 years, no child could join the school.
In my case no one knew my real age. With some pity on the part of
Masterji, I was made 4 year old that day. June 05, 1985 was put up in
documents. I was exactly 4 year and 1 month old when I was enrolled in
standard 1.\
\
Almost all the children in my village (all the villages in India?) go
through this. There are 13 children in school who are born on July 07 -
the day they took admission in a school. Well, it make sense - getting
educated is nothing less a rebirth - at least for us. Almost all of us
are born in either June or July - during the month of admissions. Few
things have changed since then. Many children are fortunate to know
their exact date of birth. Last time I helped a lot of them to find it
out by asking their mothers some 'festival' like *dussera, basant
panchami,* etc and then locating the date using Kundli Pro. Mothers
usually remember the day! Fathers are useless in these matters. In fact,
this word 'date of birth' was not known by many at out time. When the
other 'Dilawar' of my village was being interviewed for marriage, some
one from them asked, "Aapki is Date Of Birth kya hai?" (What is your
DOB?). *Six feet,*he replied. He got married by the way.\
\
TAKHTI, KALAM AND DAWAT\
*\
*\
Paper was a luxury. In fact, I always craved to see a blank page and
also write something on it. It is one of the least useful thing in my
village. There was no use of it in my house either. My mother could not
write or read. Father, though he held the record of writing high-school
exam twice and failing it both the time, he did not write much except
for his register which was gifted to him by one of his friends who was
in a bank. He only wrote to maintain his accounts. It was a 300 pages
register! It has been 19 years and still more than 50% is empty. It
contains all the accounts of income of last 19 years. The only source of
'knowledge' were pieces of old newspapers in which local shopkeeper
wrapped things father bought. Sometimes my mother used to take us to
'nanihaal'. Mamaji is a graduate. He had his books neatly kept in his
home which none of his children read them, nor cared to flip a page or
two. Sometime he bought me some notebooks and pencils. I remember I did
write something in them. Mother taught me two things well before I went
to school. How to write 'numbers' upto 10 and how to figure out time in
a clock. Thats all she knew.\
\
In class 1 we were not allowed to use ball-pen, 'dot' as we called it.
Our teacher believed that using ball-pen distorts handwriting. So he
only allowed writing on a wooden slate by a wooden pen. Sometimes
writing in ink by pen on paper sheet was allowed - at least in
exam.  And I must admit, I liked it. We used to buy ink, nib of the pen,
and papers from Deepchand shop. I remember that he charged 50p for nib,
10p for a pen ink, Rs. 2 for copy of capital brand (24 pages), and Rs 1
for a ball pen, 25p for refilling it. Using ink pen and paper was a
costly affair. My whole education in Primary school for 5 years cost my
father Rs 6.75 in fees (15p per month fee) and may be 1-2 hundreds in
books and papers.\
\
*Takhti* is a wooden slate. It got a handle of its own. You have you
blacken it by *tawa black. 'Tawa'*is a cirular iron disk on which we
cook 'roti'. Next ritual was to get a *kalam. A Kalam* is a wooden pen,
made from
[S](http://www.blogger.com/goog_1269326590170)*[aruaa](http://www.trekearth.com/gallery/photo284835.htm),*
a kind of *Saccharum Spontaneum.*Then you need *dawat (ink-pot).*Well,
on takhti, you can not write in ink properly. Besides washing it off was
a tricky thing. So you get
*[Pindol](http://en.bab.la/dictionary/hindi-english/%E0%A4%AA%E0%A4%BF%E0%A4%A3%E0%A5%8D%E0%A4%A1%E0%A5%8B%E0%A4%B2.html)
([a](http://www.blogger.com/goog_1269326590183)*[ clay](http://books.google.co.in/books?id=jQMVAAAAYAAJ&pg=PA84&lpg=PA84&dq=pindol+clay&source=bl&ots=LjvndSLZ7W&sig=ISto-EHZIj_RN8TRVfsOgpTsJa0&hl=en&ei=EGaoS5DOHsSAlAfGnM3SAQ&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=1&ved=0CAYQ6AEwAA#v=onepage&q=pindol%20clay&f=false) -
page 84). You make your ink-pot this way, with no artificial ink. So get
you wooden pen, and your clay-made-ink-pot, and your wooden slate
blacken by natural black and start writing क ख ग घ . Get a wet cloth and
wipe if clean in one stroke. Takhti was the only property we had which
could be stolen. Also, they were also used in fights. One hit on the
head and there would be blood.\
*\
*\
Till class 2, there were 2 books, one for Hindi and moral education and
second is for all other stuff. With these four articles, 2 books, takhti
and kalam, we learnt to write and read. Speaking in public was not
appreciated. Keep quiet! Most of the teacher were 'mangoos', ready to
bite at any time. Then there was *Shiv Prakash Sharma. *\
\
He was transferred from some other school, He lives in nearby town
[Seohara](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seohara)- which has an average
literacy rate of 48%, lower than the national of 59.5%. He became the
dearest for us. His methods of teaching was incredibly different. I
hardly read routine books - left nothing unread in library by the way.
When he was introduced by old teachers, I was impressed. Just because he
was from a town and not from a village. We always had a fascination for
town Seohara. It was every child's dream to go there and visit the
bazar. And if are lucky, you could also see a light bulb shining. And if
you are fortunate enough, perhaps you could remain there till dusk and
see how electricity shines the darkness.\
\
\
[![](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2010/03/img_00651.jpg?w=300)](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2010/03/img_00651.jpg)
\
\
THE LIBRARY\
\
We did not have a proper building or any sort of furnitures save chairs
and tables for teachers. Money came and eaten away by two-legged
creatures, known and unknown. Fortunately books were useless for them
and so it could see our tiny hands. This is only good thing I found in
corrupt people, they just hate books. These books were amazing., from
*Sikoya tree*to universe, Kabir to Methli Sharan Gupt, from amebae to
dinosaur, from 'math' to 'grammar' - most of the subjects were
available. Later two room building was constructed and all of the books
could find a safe place now.\
\
WAH TAJ!\
\
Getting books out of library to read was a problem. Fortunately, Shri
Shivprakash Sharma was a tea addict. Twice a day he needed tea. It used
to come from either my home or Headman home. Since my mother had a
reputation in cooking and expertise in tea making, I was preferred.
Besides my father used to buy only TajMahal tea. In fact, besides Tea he
never bought anything of good quality. Soon he'd ask only me for tea and
give me a rupee to buy *namkeen*while coming back from my home with tea.
I knew that I have become the uncrowned king of the school. It was quite
a nice thing to happen. He'd give compliments about tea and I'd pass
them to my mom. She was happy, my father was more or less happy. And of
course, I was the happiest. Now, I did not have to ask for permission to
read books. I could go, open the *box,* and get all the books I needed,
take them to home, read them, re-read them, re-re-read them, re-re-re-re
..... read them. Even in nights, if kerosene was not available,
moonlight was there : at least for 7-8 days a once a month  moon were at
its finest.  In fact, it was only moonlight which made two person from
my father generation passed high-school. Even kerosene was not available
those days. They got bit mad in their pursuit of education. So passing
high-school was considered a task of epic proportion. Children were not
encouraged to study and pass high-school. You see, one could get mad
after all.\
\
\
Kerosene is lifeline of school kids in village. Govt of India used to
supply kerosene to its villages at subsidy (or call it incentive for
studies, whatever you with). Dealers sell it in black market. They mix
it with diesel at petrol-pumps. But still at least 50-60% would come to
the village. There was no other way to buy kerosene. Electricity reached
my village in 2003, a year in which I left my village. It was quite a
night. No-one slept that night! Dogs were getting mad barking at bulbs.
Old woman were fascinated. For next month, there was no quarrel in any
home since most of ladies were busy talking about electricity only.
Somehow this 'jyoti' from light bulb made them forget their life-long
vows to do back-biting.\
\
\
When we started going to school, there was a need for watch in my home.
Before that there was no use of watch in my home. Calves were alarms for
mother and father. Whenever calves felt hunger in early morning, they'd
start mooing. Mother will get up, feed them milk and do all the work.
Father will go to the fields. Then there were sparrows and desi mainas,
infamous for their group-chattering. They were our alarms. And after an
hour, the sun is out!\
\
My mother bought a watch when she visited her mother place - and also a
big packet of Parle-G biscuits. Now there was no need to make marks in
*angan* to read the time when sun-light passes over them. There was a
famous 'pit' in our 'aangan', whenever sunlight hit it, it was 2:30 pm.
Mother cared about this time a lot. It was the time for that serial
'Shanti' on Doordarshan.\
\
PEE THANKS\
\
*Muni Ji* is (PS: was) a nice man. He has (had) two addiction, one is
gardening and other is doubling his money using some *tantras*. A sadhu
used to come to his place. Once he doubled his 500 into 1000. Later it
turned out that the *sadhu* ran way with his money. That made him quite
depressed and he chose not to talk about it. But his sorrow was visible
in his garden, which was so near to the school. There were so many
flowers. Sadabahar, roses, gurhals, dalia, *fool-button*, sunflower etc.
We liked him, he liked us too. He behaved with us well perhaps to keep
his garden out of children rage. His garden and school shared a
common boundary. Since he was nice to us, we had to thank him. We used
to pee in his garden to express our gratitude. The idea was mine. I read
in a book that pee contains urea and urea is good for crop. Everyone was
convinced that this indeed is a good way to say thanks. But sometimes
too much of thanks was bad for few of the plants. Most of ruin happened
due to our game of 'pee the farthest'. It turned out most of us had the
bladder of same capacity and we ended up hitting the same flower.\
\
GYAN UNDER BANYAN\
\
Buddha might have gotten his *gyan* under the banyan tree in peace. Our
enlightenment was received in loud. There was banyan tree (Bargad) in
the school. It was young, bigger than almost all other trees in village
but smaller than great peepal tree which used to lighten itself by
attracting fireflies during monsoon. Fortunately, no old dude had
declared that he has seen a ghost on this tree else they could have axed
it down. Ghosts and bargad are inseparable. Under its shadow, we learnt
mathematics and grammar and abusive words, some very inaccurate and
misleading lessons on sex by senior most students, the dim-wit *Mantri*
and hyper-active Hargulal. Our whole summer was passed under this tree
on *patte.*When I was in class 4, suddenly banyan tree got its mustache.
And we got jealous of class 1 for we'd no longer be able to swing on
them, but in 4 years these class 1 will enjoy them.\
\
CHANT GINTI, CHANT PAHADE AND GO HOME\
\
If the first ritual was to pray asking the mighty lord to bestow upon us
the power so we can serve our motherland, the last was to memorise ginti
(numbers) and pahade (tables). Under the banyan tree, we all sat and
chanted loudly. So loud that the farmers in field would know that the
time is 12:30 and its time to go home. When at home, I'd tell my mom
what happened at school, how fast earth rotates around sun! She was
happy.\
\
A SHANTINIKETAN\
\
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  [![](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2010/03/withsir1.jpg?w=300)](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2010/03/withsir1.jpg)
  Seohara wale Guru Ji, Shri Shiv Prakash Sharma
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

\
Till Shivparakash Shrma was there it was a Shantiniketan (house of
peace). He never dictated from books and encouraged independent
thinking. he'd send us to fields to collect leaves and bugs - which we
loved most. Sometimes, He would ask us to form a group of two and to
discover a  *paryayvachi (*synonym) of some words came to our mind.
Sometimes, he'd teach us advanced mathematical problems from grade 6-7.
Most of the time, he just talked. I impressed him many times. My biggest
achievement was solving the 'egg problem' from std 8 book which he could
not solve when his son asked him. He was so dear to me and once or
twice, I called him 'maa' in class, and class would burst in
laughter. Examinations were no pressure but marks were appreciated. But
not to the level which could push a student into depression. He never
asked what we wanted to become when we'll grow up. Perhaps the answers
were well known. They are going to be farmers after all. Still he taught
us, and taught us as well as he could. All of us enjoyed it because we
did not know for what ends why we are studying. In my first 10 years of
education, it never struck me why I was studying at all. Then I came
into contact with town-students. None of my parents wondered if I will
be able to become some else, and such views are very hard to realize by
oneself. Perhaps, having illiterate parents is a bliss. \
\
\
He retired in 2006. Now the school has a better infrastructure but
useless teacher mostly from the nearby villages. They will come, chew
pan, talk about things and go home. In villages, parents do not put
pressure on teachers that they should teach. So they can get away with
it. Neither teaching is considered as a profession of choice nor many
like it (It a looser's profession, isn't it?). Though we were not the
children of 'padhe likhe log', at our time, in per capita basis, our
library was used much more that the library of IIT Bombay is being used.
He no longer teaches but he is fondly remembered in my village as
'*seohara wale guruji*'.\
\
--\
Dilawar
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-7850182611428856722?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
