~~~~ 
title: Seeking a career in a declining profession
type: post
status: publish
id: 73
category: IIT Bombay
~~~~

Reasons for choosing a profession could be many. They invoke different
reasons to justify their choices. Ultimately one picks a career, or
remain in it, after putting a high value on it. Those who are not able
to put a high value on what they do, usually feel like 'wasting their
life'.  Karl Marx wondered why people act against their will when there
is no apparent reason to do so. Sometime, their choice may not turn out
to be a vocation and even after spending a lifetime, there is hardly any
success worth the name. It is a fact of life that perceptions of
different careers varies greatly from individual to individual. [Lata
Mangeskar is sorry for not being a classical signer; Bombay Jayashree
argues that her single song "Jara Jara" has given her more recognition
than her 25 years of classical
singing.](http://www.thehindu.com/mp/2010/01/28/stories/2010012850080200.htm)
I intend to make a career in the profession of teaching, and as a spin
off of it, a researcher. This profession has nosedived towards its nadir
and worst, the process has not paused or stopped. The reasons could be
various. Among these, one is the low premium which Indian society puts
on it. You can easily get some clue by noticing the idea of this society
has about Ph.D.. Though the word 'Research' is much appreciated than
'teaching' at any given time. Not because many of them understand the
difference between them and have a more respect for one. It is because
the idea of 'research' is quite alien to Indians. We are used to the
word 'teaching' much more than 'research'. [In fact, the Indian
Universities were modeled on the line of OxBriges at
starting](http://www.flipkart.com/book/idea-natural-inequality-other-essays/0195662598).
These universities were teaching based and the culture of research has
not seeped into Indian society up to that level. [Teaching and research
in Indian universities of India are in dire straits for various
reason](http://www.hindu.com/thehindu/2001/11/01/stories/05012523.htm)s.
Surprisingly, We were able to maintain a fair number of good
professional institutes such as TIFR, IISc, IITs,IIMs, IMSc, CMI, RRI
etc. But again, a large part of the product of some of these institutes
are criticized for their coldness towards building these institutes.
This is largely true that many of their students use these institutes
for their personal gains with little or no care for 'at whose
cost'.[Well, this is the hallmark of Indian middle class which rules
over
India](http://dilawarsays.blogspot.com/2010/03/indian-middle-class-bird-view.html).
While this 'brain drain' was heavily criticized, we have seen a rather
opposite views on it recently especially in corporate Indian media as
well as some leading international magazines such as Wall Street
Journals. This sudden change in perception becomes rather clear once we
consider who controls these magazines and newspapers. A lot of
investment has been made by NRI's in media and so they expect a
vindication of their stand. As M N Srinivas wrote**,**

> **Until recently some concern was ex**
> ****pressed about 'brain drain' from India to ****
> ****the developed  countries, and the need to ****
> 'reverse'the flow. But such concern seems to have evaporated quietly,
> and the ex
> patriates have become NRIs, whose dollars seem to be more important to
> the country than their skills, qualifications and experience.The irony
> of this situation seems to be lost on  everyone. Greenbacks are
> preferred to grey cells.

**The institute where I post-graduated, is one of the leading Institute
of India, at least in technology. It is slightly crass to notice that a
lot of resources are being poured into training a vast number of
students who are not at all concerned **engineering**. It really hard to
locate a parallel in the world in which so much is** spent/wasted**to
train individuals with the guarantee that one has no intentions of using
it. Distinguish alumni of this institutes contains lesser number of
people in technical fields than they are in other fields.**

Alumni of IIT Bombay in teaching and/or research are relatively few in
number. While this is true that a lot of IITians have done a good job in
their respective field, it is doubtful if next generation can maintain
the standards. Going by the online account of blogs and social
networking sites and some personal experiences, many students do not
seem to have any other logic than salary/job to justify their
brilliance. Ability to fetch a job in competitive market can be counted
as one good parameter; and when it is treated as the only parameter, it
speaks ill of a particular culture. Those who are concerned with the
future of IITs have reasons to be anxious. A lot of institutes in India
have declined over time. Civil services and many of our universities can
be cited as most prominent example. Civil services, an institutes which
used to churn out the scholars as well as committed civil servants, have
withered in our tropical environment.  As far as an IIT (or any other
institute) is concerned; as long as its alumni keeps contributing to its
intellectual health and the institute does not waste the public sympathy
it enjoys, it may face the challenges easily. As long as IIT is able to
get moderately well trained students in place of it looses to other
universities, they may be able to survive. But they will only survive as
the cost of other university. Other institutes suffer no less than IITs
when they loose their best students to IITs. Some of alumni of IITs have
shown a remarkable resilience in these 'modern times'. [But they are not
presented in media since these news are not as catchy as the big
placement
news](http://www.nature.com/nindia/2010/100507/full/nindia.2010.61.html).
Firstly, it is naive to expect a big level of maturity from UG's, after
all they are born in this society. Second, the level of illusion one
have in one's teenage takes time to fade. And in India, the level of
illusion is way too profound. Look at these glossy magazines and
advertisements (and unfortunately newspapers too) and one wonders
whether one lives in this country or in somewhere else. The overall
picture of some of these Institutes are good. Few universities of India
has survived the test of time. Once the great universities of Bombay,
Delhi, Aligrarh, Benaras, Kolkata have been reduced to regional
entities. The process of their ruin was done under the middle class
pressure. It is hard to agree with the people that external turmoil was
responsible was for this undoing. JNU faces as much of externalities as
DU does. Still, one could maintain the very high standards of academics.
Though the monetary situations in teaching has improved to a very
considerably high level (given the per capita income of India, this
could as well qualified to be obscene), the support from political class
as well as from general public has not seen any considerable
improvement. Barring few Institutes of high repute, most of the
universities are struggling to attract faculty. Lack of interests in
joining the profession of academia among people of a particular culture
has nothing to do with its institutes. It is intellectually mischievous
to expect that universities should create pattern of minds which
appreciate academic life. Universities can moderate or consolidate some
patterns of mind, they can not create or remove them. Perhaps, the time
will tell at which direction Indian educational system will go. With all
the foreign universities are allowed to set-up their branches in India,
it is very unlikely that they will pour resources in any domain but
profit making. The decision was taken by the elites for the elites with
little or no consideration for those who are not able to pay the cost to
educate themselves. Fortunately, we could still maintain government
funded Institutes and those who are in favor of privatization of
education should take note of their colossal success. Studying and
teaching in a technological Institutes as as IIT's, IIM's, and other
engineering colleges  which generally do not put high premium of social
sciences and humanities could well be a bottleneck for intellectual
growth of an individuals. Students of these Institutes have a very
skewed social profile and find it very hard to understand or appreciate
the social order of the day. The demand and very high level of pressure
on faculty to teach them professional courses leaves this void unfilled.
Even in few of the courses of HSS dept provides to some of these
Institutes, only economics attracts a large number of students. The
reason is simple, it helps their resume. Indian industries have been
crying loudly that universities should be more industrial friendly. They
suggest indirectly that what is good for them is good for universities.
Industries have been doing very well with these kind of trained people.
One may wonder whether there is any logic in Industries argument that
students should be taught skills which are favorable to them at the cost
of those which universities generally put a high premium on. This could
well be a big bottle-neck while teaching. Students are generally get
attracted to those courses and projects in which potential for
success/career in Industries are high. That leaves a lot of the
classroom of pure-subjects largely empty. In 'Advanced Network Analysis'
or 'Algorithm in Indian Astronomy' courses the strength of the student
was about 2-7% of what it was in 'Hardware Description Language' course
during my post-graduation. Prof Narayanan once advised me when I shared
my interest of research as 'Pure Mathematics' that what is important for
'them' might not be important for 'us'. The 'us' and 'them' usually are
'industries and allies' and 'academia and allies'. It is not necessary
that what is good for industries should be bad of universities.  But
when industries do work which is little creative and very much routine,
they should be careful in making demand from universities.
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-2100771612782967365?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
-- Dilawar
