~~~~ 
title: My stay at Institute of Mathematical Sciences, Chennai.
type: post
status: publish
id: 23
category: Uncategorized
~~~~

I just came back from the IMSc after giving my interview. There, I met
with some of the professors and researchers. Some of them turn out to be
alumni of the IIT-B so the feeling for fraternity was quite obvious
there. I was staying in the institute and had some conversation with
faculty, students and other students who came here for interview. Then
One day I went to IIT Madras to check out the facilities which I can use
during my doctorate here at IMSc. Day 01 : Saturday morning. I took auto
from the central. It was nice to be back in Chennai after two years. I
love this place. Its hot and humid. And water is salty. You have to
shampoo your hair everyday. But there are lot of things about this city
I love. Specially people. Majority of them have two qualities. One, they
are very nice and second, they don't care.  I took a prepaid auto. I
asked him during the journey. "Anna, DMK aur AIDMK?".. He said in his
mixed Hindi, English and Tamil, "I think DMK, clean sweep."  I asked
whether he voted for AIDMK. He nodded positively. After 40-45 minutes I
reached IMSc. Very Very small campus compared to IIT. Three main
building and hostel cum guest house. It is located in CIT campus and
does not have the campus of its own. After getting clearance from
security, I entered the lounge and unpacked there. The whole day I
slept. Later I took dinner and visited the library and main building,
Quite nice. Then elections results came out and surprisingly UP, Bengal
gave the most unpredicted mandate. It was nice to see that BJP did not
capitalize on divisive politics. Then I met Gaurav, very charming guy.
He was so excited about election results. He was teasing everyone. " Hey
dada, your Left is out" "What happend to Mayavati in UP, Shankar.". best
part, there is a coffee machine, its 24x7 service and payment is
voluntarily :-) and someone is always available for a cup. :-) In
evening, I met a guy from Goa. he was here for summer school. As a
typical Goa guy, He was way too much formal and polite. Smiley face and
all. We did not talk much. I just asked him about Goa's elections.
Sunday: I was having breakfast. Idli and tea (Idly + tea = Italy, I told
it to Simon who is from Italy and was working in my lab). Here comes a
man in shorts on his old cycle. I didn't know he was faculty here,
neither he looked like. Seems he did not care what the hell he is
wearing. So I asked him how is the institute. And he starts talking.
"Which field you are interested in?" "Particle physics and/or condensed
matter physics." "See condensed matter physics is best here, Mr. Ghosh
here is superstar in that area. For particle physics you should try
TIFR. " "Actually, most importantly, i want to know how is the student
culture here. I was having some chat with one of the student and It
seems quite satisfying. Does this campus seen cases for suicides?"
"Haha. no no.. no suicides. But some students can not cope with the
time. Its a long commitment. 5-6 years. And keeping yourself motivated
is a tough thing. till your first paper is out you are not that much
excited. Anyway It depends on person. Nothing is guaranteed in science.
After doc, you'll be chasing some post doc positions. till a tenure
position is not available you live like a nomad. You don't mind money
but when you have family you mind financial security. I joined this
institute, cause there is freedom. Freedom is costly. Anyway at the end
of the day things do not matter as much but anyway ask the student here.
Faculty is pretty cool here." I don't remember anything else he said. He
came in the lunch too, in the same clothes on the 80's style Hero Jet
cycle generally seen the villages and towns. It was nice seeing simple
people. Monday (Interview day) In breakfast. I was having uthpam and
tea. Someone came and took a cup of tea. I did not know he is prof here.
"Are you student here?" "No sir, I am here for JRF interview." "Oh,
which place?" "native-place or institute?" I asked. "Lets start with
native?" with a smile. He has a very small eyes. " I am from western
UP." "I know UP. which part?" "Moradabad" "Oh! congress won there,
Azharuddin was the candidate." I was surprised with the political
interest of a prof. of the physics. "Yes, actually I am born in a small
village Nichalpur, That is sixty km from Moradabad in Nijnor District on
the Moradabad-Haridwar highway." "Ok. I am from Patna." "You are here
for interview too?" "Nah, i am faculty here in theoretical physics
division." and of-course i was a bit amazed. (then mode of conversation
changed into Hindi) "Whats you name" "Dilawar" "Are you a Rajput ot or
Bhoomihaar?" I was bit surprised and educated people tends to do when
matter of caste is pops-up in front of them. I said, "yes, but I don't
believe in cast". "Oh, see! over the century people behavior changed
their mental tuning. I am not saying its in your genes, but somehow its
in you brain. I can not trust a Bhoomihaar but i can trust a Rajput. Now
you have to be adventurous and risk taker. Afterall you have to conquer,
A Brahmin has to control you to hold to his position so he has to be
cunning. So you are Thakur?" "Chauhan. But anyway, hows the institute."
"Your area of interest?" "Condensed matter physics and/or elementary
particle physics." "Oh, both of the discipline are diagonally opposite.
See anytime IISc is far better. They have a lot of department so your
thinking is not that narrow, what is your background?" "Microelectronics
and control theory. I worked on MEMS fabrication in my PG" "Ya. so in
IISc you can talk with a microelectronics guy, same time with the
physics guy and math guy." "I used to measure IMSc, IISc, TIFR at the
same level" "See when it comes to research, IISc and TIFR are better
than this place. Although some departments of TIFR are just hype. But in
Math and string theory they are superstar. In semiconductor, IMsc is the
best. IISc and TiFR has the advantage of having their own campus. They
have a lot of thinking roads where you can walk while thinking. IMSc
does not have it. Anyway its a nice place. And you'll do very good you
have a wide spectrum of knowledge." then I asked him about his own
research which i did not get into. "So from which Institute" "M. Tech
from IIT Bombay" Suddenly he eyes shone. "Oh. I am also from there. I
did integrated M.Sc. from there. then i went to IISc for Ph.D and my
classmate went to study microelectronics under the prof.. uh.. his name
is like Muslim.' "Jezer vasi" "Ya Vasi.. now he is Netherlands. He
bought BMW and 1 million pound home. You think before you join the
institute. You might become envious about your classmates later.
Microelectronics is the best engineering dept in India, you might be
getting a good job." "Yea, I am offered a pretty good job as VLSI
designer. Some more blah blah.." I was little bit ashamed of showing
off! anyway, that is why Prof Sharma told me,  "Go sit in placement,
later you can say .. sab kuch chor kar aaya huin research karne (with
his both hands in the air)" "yeah, so you'd like to think again. Anyway
a paper in Nature is anytime batter that millions of pounds. But think,
may be success of your classmate in finance will trouble you later if
you can not keep up with yourself" "Nah, I don't have friends. Second It
doesn't matter. I am not used to luxuries. My father is farmer. Nobody
in my village passed high-school before someone in my generation did.
How much time I have to think. I am 23. I should have figured out it by
now what I wanted to do in my life. Anyway How is situation of science
in India? I know recently there are really nice papers from India, that
is also going up. Apart from Indus script paper, any other paper came
out from this institute of that significance?" "Yeah, some very nice
papers came out of the institute especially in semiconductors. You might
like to study those since you are from microelectronics. Science in
India is getting better, but we never going to rule. To rule, we need
conquering spirit. Indian go along with the most optimized path. There
is a mountain, lets climb it and die on the way. This is spirit needed
to rule. They say India is going to rule in 21st century. No! Indian is
going to be prosperous. but it'll never rule. The spirit was there in
the old time. Now the same area has become BIMARU states, in the old
time they were the ruler, from the time of the Kamsutra and Lilavati now
we are reduced to some back-offices. China has improved because it does
not do its science by caste. All is homogeneous there. India has
plethora of attitude problems. Anyway things are certainly improving."
(Not verbatim) "Ya,, even in my generation there are really very nice
researcher I have seen. Mr. Ghosh, i forgot his first name, that
nano-tube sensor guy and prof Mandar Deshmukh." "Madar was my classmate
in IITB and Ghosh was my junior at IISc. Presidency college controls the
science in India. See the interview list, 80% are from Bengal. there is
a geographic divide. Students from BIMARU states have fertile mind, but
again all is lost." "Deshmukh is a very charming guy." "Yes he is. In
IITs I liked his company." "So my advise is, come and join our
institute. Do serve science. Its a long commitment and success does not
come as early as in engineering. In interview, you'll do nice. Meet me
after interview. (There were other things also which I shouldn't say
here in public domain. Regional intolerance in already on new hight in
this time in India. This time elections did not have any national
issues. It was reduced to regional chauvinism.) then I went to the
interview. It was a pleasing experience, They too delightfully wondered
why I am coming to pure science from engineering. In my interview, as
usual, I struggles with details. But on the abstract level I performed.
Lets see, what will happen. After interview, when I was leaving for
IIT-B. I met some guys from IIT delhi. He was happy to see fellow
IITian. Again, after exchanging our degree details, which i was
reluctant to reveal, He asked why from microelectronics to theoretical
physics. "May be I got the problem with my chromosome." He chuckled  and
went to his classmate to discuss what they are asking in interview.
(Result was disappointing. I did not get the seat. My parents were
happy. So the I can do the job and pay back the loan they have taken for
my education. I was little disappointed but anyway, the happiness
quotient of the world did not come down). -- PC lab IIT Bombay 1229Hrs,
May 21, 2009
![](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2009/05/3794193585985230867-9104717315841692733.gif)
