~~~~ 
title: Pass Notes : VHDL
type: post
status: publish
id: 817
tag: Hardware description language
tag: Verilog
tag: vhdl
category: Language
~~~~

**Age**  At least 2 years older than me. **Appearace** Like a
programming language. **So it's not exactly a programming language?**
No, no. I did not mean that way. It is definitely a programming
language. It got its own grammar. But it has a different purpose. **And
that is? ** To describe and simulate [digital
systems](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_electronics "Digital electronics").
It can also be used to verify the functionality of a digital system. It
is not suitable for number crunching like C. **Should I be concerned?**
Not at all unless you are (planning to be) an engineer who will make a
living by designing large VLSI systems. But if you are not an (a would
be) engineer you shouldn't be reading it. **Eh, never mind! I am an
undergraduate. What can I do with it?** You definitely can not solve
global warming or make India a safer place for women. Nor it is not
going to make you popular with girls or boys. But you it can help you
design large digital systems. **How large?** As large as the amount of
(correct) coding you can do. **It can help me more than
[Verilog](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Verilog "Verilog")?**  It has
more advance [type
system](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Type_system "Type system") so it
can catch more bugs somewhat earlier than Verilog and it has got equally
good tool-chains too. **How a strong type system helps me?** Ok, lets
have two qunatity in C program : `int speed` and `int acceleration`
representing speed and acceleration. Now adding speed into acceleration
does not make sense but you can do it in C. **Oh I see! Then why Verilog
is still popular?** Verilog is older than
[VHDL](http://www.eda.org/vasg/ "VHDL"). A lot of legacy designs are
already available in Verilog. Plus, people don't want to learn new
language. Industry has already invested a lot in Verilog etc. etc. It's
really not something we should be concerned. It is something those
people in two-piece suits are concerned about. **So a stronger
type-system is all it got! And you don't have to worry about blocking
and non-blocking statement mixing.**Yes isn't it great!**** **Not really
but this is somewhat cool. I never really understood type theory. So
what it has instead of blocking and non-blocking statements?** It's  a
note. Not a tutorial. Read a book you sophomore! **No tutorial, Eh! Tell
me something cool and I'll be on my way.** It has a free simulator
called GHDL now. You can use it to learn it. **Do say**  With a strong
type-system and a free simulator, I am doing to design the most
innovative system ever. **Don't say** Big deal! I did not use Verilog
and neither I am going to use it. Where are those 'how to start a
startup'? Learning languages doesn't make anyone rich! -- Dilawar
DISCLAIMER : (This style of 'Pass Notes' is a guardian newspaper
feature.)
