~~~~ 
title: Being Dilawar 
type: page
status: publish
id: 258
~~~~

Hello fellow Humans! I like to be called
[Dilawar](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dilawar) ( दिलावर ) which I now
find quite nice and bit romantic too if spoken by a pretty girl. In my
childhood, I did not like my name. It was way too *heavy* to carry
around. Though my life speaks for itself but most of the time it has
poor grammar. Following are most of my accomplishments and deeds I've
done. The only video game I have ever completed is `IGI-2`. I have never
played `Mario-2 `but loved `Need for Speed - Hot Pursuit`. I have never
ever been accused of `Grand Theft Auto`. I have lived in 3 states of
India and never been abroad. I contend that I am not running away from
anyone. My current mobile number has 7 prime factors and I once wrote a
love-letter to a girl and waited for an answer for at least 6 months,
therefore, I proved that `love-letters` do not always work. I never rode
an elephant, donkey or a horse, although in my childhood I did ride
buffaloes, cows and street dogs. I do not know how to swim but dream of
swimming across *Indian Ocean*. I was bitten by a bitch once on my butt
when I was looking at her puppies and by Gangaram's horse on my back for
no obvious reason reason. I really hate Gangaram. I do not have a
profile on any social network site and I never got sunburns. I can do
farming and love walking in campus on *Then Thinking Road* which
connects my hostel and my department. Since my childhood, I have
consumed more than 8659 liters of cow's milk. I have never played any
musical instruments and have stopped singing after hearing my own
recordings. I just love Indian Ocean, especially Sushmit Sen's guitar
playing. I have trouble with English grammar and during my pursuit of
English, somewhere I lost my grip over *Hindi*. I'd love to be
emotionally bilingual. If by any chance you are a Historian or
Anthropologist, here is my brief history.

### A brief history of Dilawar

My ancestor were so happy living in Iran.
[Avestan](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Avestan_language) was their
mother tongue. It was written right to left and have a strong emphasis
on minute phonological differences. One day I don't know what happened,
a group of dissidents broke away. They were literally pissed off. Why?
Hard to say! May be because they were dissidents and did not like others
hushing them up. Or may be, they were just pissed off. They decided that
they must leave and start their own. It could well had been a case of
'get lost you ass\*\*\*\*\*". But whatever was the case, they did not
like the *status-quo.*. So they took their horses and came to settle in
North India. Few of them migrated to Europe and now known as *German*.
They called themselves '[aryan](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arya)'
which was derived from *Avestan*. They might have displaced a large
number of '[Dravidian](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dravidians)' over
there who are claimed to be the native of this land.*Dravidians* now
live in South India and are proud of their longest surviving 'culture'
despite of this colossal plundering (if happened). My ancestors must
have been a ruthless tribe when it came to its own benefits. `Aryans`,
as they called themselves, were fond of horses. In fact, old
Indus-Valley civilisation never knew of horses. [All they knew were
bulls and cows](http://www.thehindu.com/fline/fl1720/17200040.htm). So
pissed of my ancesstors was with their Aventan brothers that they came
up their own language and gave it name `Sanskrit` (the perfect one).
They must have liked to make things perfect. I like that. They did not
like to write the way their Avestan brothers did. They wrote  left to
right. In addition, I don't know why, they did not like the sound of
'h'. They replace 'h' with 's'. So *Hapta-Hindu* became *Sapta-Sindhu*,
*Ahura* is now *Asura, Harxvati* is *Sarasvati* and so on. But this did
not stop here, often the meaning of gods were also reserved, . Not
surprisingly, *Ahura* were gods in *Avestan*, *Asura* is the demon in
Sanskrit. *Indira* is king of god for the Sanskrit, He was demon for the
Avestan. Seriously something really bad must have haveened among them.
In fact old Avestan is [similar to the oldest
Sanskrit](http://www.ancientscripts.com/avestan.html). You can translate
text in one language to another by anotherlying few phonological
changes. Like so: Blue is Avestan, Black is Sanskrit. The ə symbol
represents the mid central vowel (schwa) like the "e"s in "taken". First
line is Aventan, second is in Sanskrit.

> təm amavantəm yazatəm
> tam amavantam yajatam
> surəm damohu scvistəm
> suram dhamasu savistham
> miθrəm yazai zaoθrabyo
> mitram yajai hotrabhyah

Initially, 'arya' meant 'to till'. In those agrarian societies, it was
considered a noble profession. This, still, is considered noble by some
if not by many. [Then  they decided that there should be the the
division of labour and came out with
caste-system](http://books.google.co.in/books?id=XsOtRGdvIigC&printsec=frontcover&source=gbs_navlinks_s#v=onepage&q=&f=false).
Arya in this age came to mean 'the noble'. Why? Elites were not in
'agriculture' so they changed the meaning to reclaim this title. So few
of my ancestor became noble, and those who did farming were considered
`mlichcha` (the lower one, not-pure). The Sanskrit was refined in this
period and the best grammar in the world was written by
[Panini](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/P%C4%81%E1%B9%87ini). Indian
intellectual traditon in those days was too exclusive in nature.
Learning of Sanskrit was the prerogative of few. Needless to say, a new
language was evolved which is called
*[Prakrit](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prakrit)*. *Prakrit* was spoken
by the masses and *Sanskrit* was reserved as the language of learning
and scholarship. Pratrik was considered a language of *Malichcha (*the
lower ones). In fact, even these days, Sanskrit is replaced by English
in letter and spirit. The language which evolved from *Prakrit* (e.g.
Hindi and its relatives) is now spokes by masses and considered the
language of `malichcha` by English-speaking elites (never mind the
lip-services to their mother tounge which largely comes from the
slight embarrassment for not being able to honour their mother-tongue.)
My ancestors were curious about universe. Their knowledge was centered
around the universe. Astrology and Mathematics were intertwined.
Whatever they knew, they put it in `Vedas` which literally meant 'to
know'. This was their science. I feel proud of them. When 'Vedas' came
to end, they called it Vedanta : 'the end of knowing'. Why would they do
that? I can not say! Perhaps they stopped appreciating the changes.
Perhaps that was the worst thing to happen in our intellectual life.
Since then my ancestor lost sight of the way they were going. Hinduism
was never a religion; it was considered a way of life. Now it has been
downgraded to a religion and people fight over it everyday almost all
the time - in fact there was a time in which the most narrowed version
of Hinduism (so called Hindutva) came to fore. Perhaps the strongest
quality of Hinduism lies in its chaotic nature for allowing every kind
of infusion into it, that is why it survived (to quote [Ashish
Nandy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashis_Nandy)). Living in a rich and
fertile land is not without any danger. Lot of people vie for such
lands. Han Chinese attacked these lands. Few stayed, married here, and
settled down in the places [called Haryana, Punjab and near
by](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indo-Scythian)  areas. Few of them are
known as *[Jats](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jat_people)*. Alexander
came to India and few of his soldiers stayed here. They married local
princess. [They now belong to a much wider idea of
'Rajputs](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Origin_of_Rajputs)'. A clan of
them in known as [Chauhans](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chauhan). They
have a rich tradition and not to mention larger than life Chauhan king,
the [Prithviraj
Chauhan](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prithvi_Raj_Chauhan) who is fondly
remember for his valour among old and for his love affair with princess
[Sanyogitika](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sanyogita) among the teens.
My forefathers belongs to this clan. Chauhans are generally considered
soft in nature, quite a painful insinuation in the land which is
surrounded by more feudal clans of*Jats, Vishnoi, Thakurs, Chaudhiry*
etc. This is perhaps due to the fact that domestic violence is the
lowest among them. So the childhood is passed without witnessing much
violence and that mellowed them down. They had a long tradition of
treating women with utmost pride and dignity. I am proud to own that
heritage. The relative sanity of my village is due to the lack of
interest in alcohol and other manly stuff. So I stand here in front of
you. My first name is like a Muslim as to prove my Iranian links. There
is symbol of 'OM' permanently tattooed on my right hand as to symbolize
my 'Vedic roots'. My clan shares their genes with Greeks who are quite
famous for their Mathematics, Philosophy and system of governance. And
of course not to mention the educational exposure which I have been
through is mostly Western. I am a product of such a long and rich
history. This feeling makes me warm again and again. END NOTES: [1] On
Rajputs, See John Keay, "India". In fact he devoted a full chapter on
them. [2] Avenstan and Sanskrit links see "Early India" Romilla Thapar;
Thapar 8, 112, 232.(See index page of this book for more details). [3] I
did a internet sortie for various information (I plead guilty).  
