~~~~ 
title: on Facebook
type: post
status: publish
id: 59
category: Uncategorized
~~~~

Gee... Using FB and criticizing it.. Well, that's the best part of
social networking!\
\
If you have few friends on FB or Orkut then you are a loser, and if you
have too many, your are kind of a 'social slut' - that's what flies
around these days. The common wisdom diffused in our head by corporate
media that the 'job-givers' are using them to analyze their potential
candidates. That's leaves us in a dilemma. If your friends are few then
your chances are higher in 'banking' and less in 'management'... Man! So
it has become a 'market norm' rather than a 'social norm'.\
\
In house sociologists of facebook had something to say, "[that the
average number of friends in a Facebook network is 120. And when it
comes to real, intensive interaction, that number shrinks dramatically.
It turns out that the average Facebook male interacts with only four
people and the average female with
six](http://www.economist.com/science-technology/displaystory.cfm?story_id=13176775).\
\
Here is my observation about Facebook users, especially after seeing
their "Top 10 friends list", "The chances that someone exists in you top
10 list is much higher if they have the almost same number of friends."
The pattern is more acute in undergraduates and school goers.\
\
[In fact a paper appeared by a respected university has something more
to say](http://jhfowler.ucsd.edu/genes_and_social_networks.pdf). It
'*reveals that social connectivity is partially genetic. Researchers
James Fowler, Christopher Dawes, and Nicholas Christakis compared data
on 1,110 identical and fraternal twins from 142 schools and found
heritability in "in-degree" (how many people call you a friend),
"transitivity" (how many of your friends are friends with each other),
and "centrality" ([how easy it would be to play six degrees of Kevin
Bacon using you in the role of Kevin
Bacon](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Six_Degrees_of_Kevin_Bacon) - I dont
know who the hell is this guy!.) "Out-degree" (how many people you name
as friends), however, is not significantly heritable*.' The genes are
still not leaving the Human nature. Its been 30 year since the '[The
selfish genes'](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Selfish_Gene) was
published and still echoes in our intellectual landscapes This is not
highly doubted after in a seminal paper '[Mental Wealth of the
Nation](http://www.mentaalkapitaal.nl/docs/Nature%20-%20The%20Mental%20Wealth%20of%20Nations.pdf)'
it has been settled that genes plays (if any) at most 15-20% part. Even
if leave genes alone, this research says that the "[200 male college
students, put them in groups for the purpose of planning a party, and
then had them rate each other's likability. It found that the most
popular students were the most likely to bust the budget or suggest
illegal stuff like
drugs](http://www.blogger.com/goog_568002349803 "Psychology Today looks at Psychopharmacology")[and
hookers. They also tended to carry a variation of a
serotonin-receptor](http://www.blogger.com/goog_568002349803)[gene](http://www.blogger.com/goog_568002349803 "Psychology Today looks at Genetics")[associated
with impulsivity and rule-breaking behavior. Everyone likes the bad
boys](http://news.msu.edu/story/5774/&topic_id=10)." In India, this
behaviour might not be that acute but the patterns could be the same.\
\
How can you have, as the authors write, "too much of a good thing?" They
hypothesize that "Individuals with too many friends may appear to be
focusing too much on Facebook, friending out of desperation rather than
popularity, spending a great deal of time on their computers ostensibly
trying to make connections in a computer-mediated environment where they
feel more comfortable than in face-to-face social interaction."\
\
A copy and paste from this paper, "*Finally, social networks may serve
the adaptive (or maladaptive) function of being a vehicle for the
transmission of emotional states (38), material resources, or
information (e.g., about resource or**partner availability) between
individuals. Some traits that appear to spread in social networks also
appear to be heritable (such as obesity (20, 39), smoking behavior (40,
41), happiness (42, 43), and even political behavior (22, 23, 44–46)),
suggesting that a full understanding of these traits may require a
better understanding of the genetic basis of social network topology*."\
\
POLITICAL MISUSE\
-----------------------\
Ever wonder why Iranian ,Indian, and Chinese finds it easier to enter US
campuses despite that US governments hated/hates these countries. We all
know how 'Indira Gandhi' was called bitch by a US president and the
newspaper greeted her with this headline, "Here comes Indian PM with a
begging bowl'. Or the US secretary of States comes to India when US-Indo
Nuclear deal and says, "*Mr. Prime Minister, We'll make you great!*"
Followed with the national dailies headlines, "*India Nuked"* and all
the celebration. China had been the biggest foe of US but still maximum
students are in US are from China. Iran also sees the same pattern. [A
white paper coming out of think
tank](http://www.nytimes.com/2007/02/07/world/asia/07iht-air.4509556.html)
suggest that, "*India can be a easy ally of US since a lot of people in
power are educated in US unlike the previous generation which was
largely Europe educated and naturally anti-US."*Well seeing the
development, this indeed worked really well. No [longer Bhopal gas
tradegy is concern and a bill is now being introduced so that the
companies do not have to run
away.](http://beta.thehindu.com/opinion/lead/article243734.ece) Monsanto
and Enron had already done their part. US had shown enough character
with Tarapur reactor.\
\
Facebook is in the reach of elites of this nation. It represents the
collective psyche of this class. Just break into the Facebook server and
Hey Presto!, '*You have the whole thinking of a nation in your hand*'.
Now design your policy according to them. If the nation is sex obsessed
then [you have the gal to make ads like
this](http://www.geekologie.com/2009/03/hands_down_the_worst_advertise.php).
And make a controversy as they did with 'veil' in Muslim world. A Nobel
Laureate and Turkish writer Orhan Pamuk reveals than in 1905 there was
no v[eil to be found in northern Turky, girls used to run around with
bare head and on
cycles](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Headscarf_controversy_in_Turkey).
When a french opera house came there for a show they have to travel 200
miles in southern Turkey to get a 'hijab'. After they [West] hit on
'veil', they [Muslims] tried to hit back and tried to prove their
identity by embracing the 'Hijab'. [Snow - a Novel]. How much energy
they could have put in their development rather than defending their
identities. A few words can bring a nation down.\
\
Already Google is giving clues how to woo a consumer, [even if there is
nothing logical between the ad and
product](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P2cqlw3pwFw). Now, you can have
clues how to woo a nation. Once you know the popular mentality is tilted
towards US in the one of the most 'ass-licking' form, they go ga ga with
all their US policies. Even the government does not hesitate to put
McKinney consultants on RBI board - which would recommend to give
subsidy to corporates a whopping Rs 1 crore a minute while their Public
Distribution System is in doldrums due to lack of funds.\
\
Information will be the next 'WMD'. With so much of information
available, who ever control it will control the world. Others will only
ribbit some times of other. Its high time India (and her citizen) finds
her (their) missing global voice (as China is doing now) if she wants to
remain sovereign. Followers never lead.  \
\
RELATED ARTICLES:\
[1] [http://www.nytimes.com/2010/03/17/technology/17privacy.html](http://www.nytimes.com/2010/03/17/technology/17privacy.html)\
[2] [http://beta.thehindu.com/opinion/op-ed/article257641.ece](http://beta.thehindu.com/opinion/op-ed/article257641.ece)\
\
\
--\
dilawar
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-8447692840976013105?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
