~~~~ 
title: Caste and other 'branded for life' thingy
type: post
status: publish
id: 827
tag: Caste in Modern India
tag: caste old and new
category: IIT Bombay
category: Indian Society
~~~~

[caption id="attachment\_934" align="aligncenter" width="462"][![One of
t-shirt designed by IITians at IIT Bombay. It says 'not of everyone'
signifying exclusivity of brand or caste
IITian.](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2013/02/img_0412.jpg?w=660)](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2013/02/img_0412.jpg)
One of the t-shirts designed by IITians at IIT Bombay. To some extent,
the process of t-shirt design is democratic. Designs can be submitted by
anyone and few are chosen (perhaps by voting). Since a lot of IITians
are involved in t-shirt designing, these are good candidates for
studying the nature of IITians. This t-shirt belongs to Electrical
Engineering department and says 'not for everyone' signifying either the
exclusivity of IITians or the superiority of Electrical Engineering
department over other departments. Almost all designs are
self-congratulatory. Other explicitly self-congratulatory designs read :
'branded for life', 'it is in our genes', 'some say its attitude, we say
its superiority'. Notice the uses of superlatives and words signifying
sense of hierarchy. Symbols of superiority and inferiority are common to
literature of any caste.[/caption] Social life in India is marked by
subordination of individual to the group. This is not to say that Indian
society knows 'anything of individuals' but the claims of group often
prevail of claim of an individual [1]. Family, being a universal social
group, is a good candidate for comparison and contrast. An Indian family
makes its claims most vigorously at the time when education and marriage
of children are being arranged. Such claims legitimize themselves by a
value-system based on customs. Customs justify themselves by asserting
their antiquity over anything else. If a group makes its claim on
individual and expect from him a moral obligation to be loyal to it,
then in return it offers patronage and a sense of security. Majority of
Indians who feel safe and secure only in some 'group' or extended
kinship develop a deep urge to be identified with a group : Jats,
Brahmins, Tamils, Gujrati, IITians, IIMians etc. I do not wish to
comment on identities based on language or religion for they are
universal but I wish to point out those groups which are unique to South
Asia namely Caste and its modern avatars. It has been pointed out that
intelligentsia tends to neglect social customs and 'habits of heart'
which students of societies are obsessed with. We find these 'habit of
hearts' and social customs most important and defining feature of a
society. I was struck by more by similarities than differences between
rural and urban India. Coming from a rural Western Uttar Pradesh where
people are segregated according to their castes in villages, it was
surprising to see that people are segregated according to 'class' ; in
cities government has its own HIG, MIG and LIG residential areas where
people are segregated according to their class. In villages, a high
value is placed over areas where high-caste people in live. In my first
encounter with city people, my classmates put similar values on
'posh-areas'. They can be seen enquiring about such areas whenever they
visit another city. It would not be a great exaggeration to suggest that
educated and uneducated Indians do not differ from each other in very
fundamental way. Nonetheless, educated Indians tends to be
self-consciously virtuous to an unusual degree. They are much more
successful at hiding those customs and habits which they have come to
regard as backward, feudal or embarrassing. Caste is an institute which
still governs life of Indians, educated and uneducated alike. This is
not to say that changes have not occurred in Indian society. Indians,
who live in villages and towns, are realistic and vocal about castes.
They don't feel any embarrassment talking about about it. But 'educated'
Indians in cities and towns suffer from a certain kind of myopia about
their own society. They are very sensitive to the question of caste. Any
conversation on caste with them will reveal a some amount of
embarrassment and a great deal of ignorance. Any debate on caste, unlike
most of the debates in India, generates less heat but it lends itself
very easily to polemic. Most Indians, among whom I roam, consider caste
an unmixed evil and wish it out of existence. I am not suggesting that
it is a good thing. Most of them like to think that caste does not
exists in their society or at least their personal affairs are not
governed by it. When prodded somewhat, they would concede that it still
exists in many if not most part of India but they themselves have
nothing to do with it. These days they are more explicit about these
feelings and many of them subscribe to two-nation theory : everything
embarrassing and backward belong to Bharat; anything modern and forward
looking belongs to India of whose they are the torch-bearer. When
pointed out that inter-caste marriages in their own 'Indian societies'
are still very rare (though increasing), they can not explain it in a
straight-forward way. Also their friend circle rarely have people from
different categories. It is all too natural for a human being to sweep
under the carpet those customs which embarrasses him and not speak of
it. Moreover if tormented long enough about caste, they might even
accuse one of having a morbid or obscurantist temperament, if not a
medieval mentality. No student of Indian society can avoid the question
of caste. It was and still is of fundamental value which governs Indian
society. Caste provides many clues which enables us to understand Indian
society in better ways. It is not just an organization which ranks
people high and low, it is also a system of values which gives a
ideological justification for prevent hierarchies. Indian intellectuals
have had a mixed record in predicting the role of caste and analyzing
its nature . Marxists denied caste its place in Indian society and they
denied it categorically that caste plays any important role in Indian
society. For them class was of utmost importance and caste was mere a
byproduct of class-struggle. On the other hand, many free-wheeling
intellectuals these days like to assert that Indian preoccupation with
caste has seen little or no change [2].

\*\*\*\*\*

It is not the existence of caste but its longevity which has surprised
many social anthropologists. Caste is perhaps the most ingenious social
invention ever devised by man to keep social hierarchy in place. For
this reason (and novelty attached to it), it has been studied by
anthropologists world over and a large body of comparative literature
has been produced. Various definitions and theories about its origin and
evolution have been proposed and debated. If one can find his way out of
this vast literature on caste, it can improve our understanding of our
society. Max Weber thought that it was the 'concern for status' which
was at the center of the obsession with the caste. For him, caste was a
status group. [Late Prof. Louis
Dumont](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Louis_Dumont "Louis Dumont"), who
was the leading European authority on kinship, found root of caste in
religion ('Holism' as he called it) and he criticized Weber for
attaching caste with status too much. Also, a racial theory has been
proposed that caste was a product of two groups - immigrants and natives
- coming in close encounter with each other. The immigrants Aryans tried
to protect the purity of their blood by intermarriage (notice the
voluntarism) , therefore endogamous closed groups. These groups were
called castes. This theory has a great appeal to modern mentality but it
does not explain the longevity of caste. What is important to us here is
not the definitions and their comparisons but how caste is perceived by
common folks. It has been said that caste initially meant 'division of
labour' and I can not say how many Indians like to see it that way. In
many of theories proposed by apologetic Indians about the nature of
caste, acceptance of it is believed to be voluntary : that people
accepted their inferior status by choice and it was not forced by laws
or ideologies, religious or secular. It sounds strange to me, though not
wholly unconvincing, that that indeed was the case. For I do not know
any large civilization like ours in which a large section of people
accepted a 'inferior brand' by choice without showing any sign of
discomfort. Another view of caste (rather a definition of it) was
proposed by Ms. [Irawati
Karve](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Irawati_Karve "Irawati Karve"). Mrs.
Karve classified Indian society as made up of 'real groups'. These
groups which entered the system at a given time was recognizable by its
customs and the physical characteristics of its members. Perhaps this is
not how our ancestors saw castes but this is closer to how we see them.
Our ancestors build a theory based on purity and pollution to justify
the caste based on hierarchy. Brahmins were the proponent of this theory
and they thought of themselves the purest one. They took great care not
to pollute themselves by coming in the touch with polluting castes. Not
only certain groups were polluting, there were works which were
considered ritually defiling and to engage in those works were to loose
one's caste which was equivalent to civil death. Much of the Indian
contempt toward manual work has its root in it. There were elaborated
rules on exchange of 'roti and beti' (food and daughter). One can take
daughter of a lower-caste family in marriage but can not give one to
them; and one can give food to the lower castes but could not accept it
from them. These practices were very elaborate and widespread in the
past. Practice of unaccountability is not as severe these days even in
villages where it has been replaced by atrocities against dalits to some
extent. However, practices related to marriage have not changed much,
especially when one arranges marriage of his daughters. In matters
related to marriages, the obsession with purity ran really deep. The
upper middle class section of society which saw themselves as
socially-forward those days used to marry their daughters before the
onset of puberty (in a state of being pure) and those who delayed the
marriage of their daughters beyond puberty invited a great deal of
castigation and reprimand. Those who consider themselves
socially-forward these days do just the opposite. Interestingly, the age
of marriage of girls was one of criteria which Mandal commission used to
describe social backwardness. How can one say nothing has changed in
this country when something which was morally-backward to our
grandmothers and mothers has become a symbol of social forwardness to
our sisters and daughters?

\*\*\*\*\*\*

My intention in this post to find similarities between castes and
certain groups or rather 'brands' (as they are often called) with which
some people in this country voluntarily attach to themselves. And I wish
to put one of such brands called
[IITian](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indian_Institutes_of_Technology "Indian Institutes of Technology")
under sociological enquiry. Other similar brands are students of IIM,
Indian Administrative Service, and officers in armed forces. I'll
restrict myself to IITian for I have been living among them for many
years now. When I joined IIT Bombay in 2007 for post-graduation studies,
at the time of orientation enough hints were given by Head of the
Department those days that he considers UGs superior to PGs. These
beliefs may not be acknowledged by all professors but those who took
their undergraduate degrees from IITs are most likely to have one. For
when they proudly claim to be IITians, they are not claiming to be a
heir of some intellectual tradition. They simply don't have one. They
want to assert something which is widely acknowledged : the superiority
attach to this symbol called IITian. If there is no superiority attached
to a symbol, a upwardly socially mobile Indian would not be fascinated
by it. It was amusing to be introduced to hierarchy on the campus on the
very first day by HOD (He took his B.Tech. from this IIT) which was
known to us anyway. Those days I saw IITias more of a faction than a
'brand'. It is a form of pseudo-kinship which Indian usually make
wherever they go. The reason is perhaps more psychological than social.
An Indian finds very hard to be himself and he loves to be surrounded by
'his' people : a sort of pseudo family. He feel safe and secure only
among his kinsmen. They have a kinship based on the name of the
institutes for given their size they could no longer find enough people
belonging to any other shared identity. As the size of IIT Bombay is
increasing, so is the numbers of other 'real groups' : Bengali, Marathi,
Malayalam and other such groups are easily noticeable and are actively
promoting themselves though they have not yet taken the center stage as
they do in many other universities. The shared identity called IITian
trumps them all. It was a logo on their t-shirt which caught my
attention. if I remember correctly it claimed that they are 'branded for
life'. More I thought about it, more I became obsessed with the idea
that it may be some form of a caste. For caste also brands an individual
for life. The brand called 'IITian' is different from brand like
'engineer'. This is a subscription-based brand for one has to do some
engineering to keep his subscription active. On the other hand, the
brand IITian like a caste, does not depend on subscription. Even if they
don't do any engineering or technological work, they can still wear it
proudly. Like Brahmins who do not study classical text or Chamars who do
not do any leather-work anymore are still seen as Brahmins and Chamars.
Who belongs to this caste/brand? The undergraduate students of Indian
Institute of Technology definitely do. And many postgraduates would love
to have it, at least outside the campus where the value of such a tag is
widely acknowledged. This process where a inferior caste mimics the
social customs of superior caste to gain a high social status was called
'Sanskritization' by M. N. Srinivas [ Sankritization, Srinivas in
'Social change in modern India'] . Various castes indeed changed their
status from ST to OBC to other general categories. Many of them have
successfully reverted back after quotas in jobs and educational
institute were offered. Fully Sanskritized castes were in the processes
of what is called by Srninivas 'Westernization'. Both Sankritization and
Westerisation are complex phenomenon and can be observed almost every
section of Indian society. In our case, the UG are in the process of
Westernisation (already Sanskraitzed) by chasing respective social
symbols : foreign degrees and internships. The post-graduates are also
actively engaged in the process of Westernisation but they are in the
process of Sanskritization too; by mimicking the customs of U.G. When I
joined in 2007, there was no social-custom of 'profile reading' among
post-graduates (the tone and language used by them is comparatively
extremely civilized). It has now become commonplace among them too.
Therefore, it is safe to say that not only superiority of UG is
asserted, it is also widely acknowledged if only implicitly. Unlike
castes, access to this brand is fixed not by birth but to success in a
competitive examination called Joint Entrance Examination (JEE). Much
they like to separate birth with merit, it is a known fact, to the
discomfort to egalitarian world over, that merit if not intelligence and
birth are closely related. Access to post-graduation in IITs is fixed by
another competitive examination called Graduate Aptitude Test in
Engineering (GATE). These examinations tests abilities of menial mental
manipulation but they are valued highly especially by those who fails in
them. There is some confusion if post-graduate students can also claim
this brand. My experience tells me that the undergraduates in IITs are
at best half-hearted about sharing their 'brand' with post-graduates.
The reason for it : a trait of caste named exclusivity. One professor in
my department revealed something deeply psychological : the dual degree
do not write M. Tech. on their resume, they write senior undergraduate
(or something like that if my memory serves me wrong). The 'JEE
crackers', as they like to call themselves, consider themselves superior
to 'GATE crackers' because of the fact that almost all those who writes
GATE must have written JEE in their school days. This is largely true
for cities and towns. Anyone who thinks of himself 'smart enough' and
have access to at least a middle class family writes this examination.
So if they were really as 'intelligent' or 'smart', this theory
suggests, they could have been successful in JEE in the first place.
Therefore they are inferior. This belief is so widespread that it is
never questioned for one can ask if 'intelligence' is an innate quality
and does not depend of mental exercises done daily than why so many of
'JEE crackers' can only go through in more than one attempts. What one
can make out of the intelligence of those who failed in first attempt
and got a really impressive score in the second or third attempt? I
wonder if they ever told themselves that they are as intelligence now as
they were before cracking any examination. Besides the claim of having a
superior intellect is at best phony for it is coming from a group which
is yet to produce their equivalent of Bose, Raman and Saha. This modern
Indian obsession with merit can be compared with the ancient Hindu
obsession with purity. Both purity and intelligence are hard to define
but none of it diminish their respective obsession. The Brahmins may not
have produced a definite commentary on what purity really is --
consistency and universality were never issues on which they lost any
sleep -- but they elaborated in great details many customs and practises
by which purity can be violated. The modern times have similar attitude
toward merit (which is confused with intellect). Like purity in our
medieval or ancient order, merit is of supreme value to all competitive
industrial society and it is natural that they love to measure it. There
is still some doubt about the nature of merit and intelligence but as
one American social scientist has put it, 'Intelligence, like
electricity, is easy to measure than to define'. So these societies with
America leading the way go on measuring intelligence with vengeance.

\*\*\*\*\*\*

'Branded for life' is minimum any caste promises. Granted that one's
place in IITs is not fixed by birth as it is with the caste. But the
idea here is not to find a logical equivalent but to highlight many
similarities. Being born in a particular type of family makes it easier
to get access to these brands. One still needs to do some work and
requires some luck but what about those whose life chances are severely
restricted because they were born in the wrong type of family by the
accident of birth? Just for the sake of argument, I would like to
classify caste IITian as a twice-born or 'dwijha' castes. You are born
in a middle class family which has enough material and intellectual
capital. Such families want to secure the best possible education for
their offspring. The first birth is this caste is when one is an
'inspiring IITian' and there are so many of them. The second birth in
this caste happens when one cracks JEE after a year or two (or perhaps
more) training in a coaching center : a sort of a 'yagopaveet sanskar'.
In middle class families, children are not only groomed from a very
early age to join such elite-clubs they are also taught to value the
status attached with it. And they must feel really fascinated by these
brands which in due time become a part of their identity. Weather or not
they do justice to the name of the institute they are so fascinated
with, they take these identities to their graveyard with them. Any
attack on this identity are not taken lightly. It is then natural that
they feel a need to preserve the value of their brand (purity of their
caste). The reactions toward opening up more IITs among IITians
consolidated my belief. They were concerned that opening up new IITs in
otherwise mediocre educational system would devalue the brand IIT. It
does not follow that IIT Gandhinagar will devalue IIT Bombay. And they
were not concerned with IIT Bombay as such anyway. There concern is with
the 'brand/caste' IITian. They are perhaps interested in the well-being
of their institute and its reputation but they are also very interested
in preserving their brand. There must not be a large numbers of IITians
(even if all of them are undergraduates) else the exclusivity (purity of
caste) will be compromised. Many of them do not like sharing it with
post-graduates and suggests that IIT should be UG only. What sort of
professor would like to teach in a college where he would spend his time
only with UGs and with no research students, whether of not they have
'sharp antennas'? The obsession with hierarchy is fundamental to caste.
The hierarchy does not lead itself automatically to authority. My right
hand is superior to my left hand without having any authority over it.
The outcome of hierarchy is the feeling of superiority and inferiority.
It is not to say that these feelings are bad one. If there are no such
feelings, no profession and individual will grow. But these feelings in
our society are usually group based. No institute can function if it
does not discriminate among individuals as superior or inferior for a
certain kind of job. I find it irritating, to put is mildly, when I see
obsession with groups based discrimination. On Indian universities,
departments are ranked superior or inferior according to a well
established model of hierarchy. EE and CSE are superior to other
departments for reason too obvious to all of us. It is a feature of a
society which 'hierarchicise' everything : people and places, gods,
festivals are heirachicised but also intellectual disciplines according
to some of the most pettiest reasons. One can classify students on IIT
Bombay campuses when one is inclined to classify according to a caste as
following : B. Tech and D. D. are General Castes, M. Tech. are Other
Backward Caste (OBC), and Ph.D. are Untouchables. And to stay here to
pursue another degree is equivalent of loosing one's caste for an
inferior one. Who has heard of many Indian loosing their caste (even
metaphorically) to some inferior one in a right state of mind? The
hierarchy of department is well established according to ranks of
students joins them and remains fairly constant for every year a fixed
section of merit lists which goes to certain department. The counseling
for admission is farce and it is there because a modern university must
have one. No student is really interested at the time of joining in
knowing what he wants to do in his life for he is not raised this way :
he is greatly stimulated and rarely inspired. And once he got the
symbols he was fascinated with, his stimulation wears off.  There is
simply no pressure on him to excel anymore when his kinsmen do not put a
premium on it. Parents impose their will on their children without any
sense of guilt or concern for their status depends on the status of
their children. This is natural in a society where individual do not
have it place under the sun. Getting into jobs which does not do justice
with their current status causes them a great agony. The status is not
only attached to jobs but also to internships at certain places and to
extra-curricular activities of certain type. Among the highest Varna
(The UGs), there are sub-castes. When there is [no PG to compare their
penises
with](http://dilawarrajput.wordpress.com/2012/12/16/an-open-letter-to-iit-undergraduate/),
they turn to these sub-castes for comparison. They compare according to
JEE Rank which correlate well with their department. Not only there are
sub-castes according to departments, another 'varna' has come into
being. This one is based on the type of JEE one has cracked. Old time
IITians love to compare themselves on the nature of JEE. Their's was
superior to what these days IITians are cracking (A, B, C, D kind). They
take pride in telling them and others that they have gone through much
rigorous subjective examination than objective-questions based
examination these days. Much has been said about the nature of
questions. It is a pity that too little has been said if the new JEE or
GATE has lost their discriminatory powers. It is very important for an
institute to make sure that its examinations discriminate effectively
among its residents : students (not only those who are inspiring to join
but also those who have joined them) and staff alike. Some concerns was
raised about the nature of questions asked in examinations is valid for
no one can deny the falling level of sophistication of problems. The
root-cause for continuing with objective-examination lies somewhere
else. It is not entirely due to easy management of objective examination
which has promoted A,B,C,D kind of examination. Objective examinations
are, above everything else, least prone to invite the accusation of
unfair evaluations. And it is very important in a society where anyone
can accuse anyone out of habit. The longevity of caste teaches us two
things : the obsession with value system which justify hierarchy and
promotes the concern for status as value. Where there is a hierarchy
which is rarely questioned and widely recognized as a natural scheme of
thing, one will find a great deal of similarity in it with classical
caste system. Caste system in the past legitimize its hierarchy by the
idea of pollution and purity. The 'branded for life thingy' discussed
here as caste legitimize its hierarchy by the theory of merit and
intelligence. The early description of castes assumes its root in
rituals and both Indians and Western student agreed on it. This belief
is now on a shaky ground. For who can deny the irreversible decline in
the ritualistic aspect of caste? But this decline did not result in
similar decline in caste system. It is important to think of secular
aspects of caste system which has not declined with time. NOTE : Old
version of this article [was posted
here](https://groups.google.com/forum/?fromgroups=#!folder/samwad/samwadiitb/qrlC1_0ckIg).
First 3 comments on this article was on this version. I am not deleting
these comments for their historical value. -- Dilawar
