~~~~ 
title: ... Inequalities... &quot;Everyone likes misery...
type: post
status: publish
id: 21
category: Uncategorized
~~~~

In 1943, there was a famine in Bengal, though the total grain available
was higher than that of 2001 (if Amartya Sen is to be believed). Then
why in 1943, 3 million indian perished. Sen argued that the impression
(rumour) of the shortage of grain made the price higher than ever before
even though there was not a crop failure. And the government did not
stop exporting the rice (British and free market champions were at the
government of course, as we got today), it still remain a mystery how
come so called intellectual at that time failed to curb it. They just
did not care or they liked poor people dying out. Or perhaps Raj was
wrong why famine occurs. You know what is most remarkable all about
this.. In 1943, per capita availability of food grain was 147.5 kg,
which is now 141.7 kg!! Still G. W. Bush was blaming Indians and Chinese
for the skyrocketting the food prices. The stupid NYTimes joined the
debate too. While nobody explains why only for that 2 weeks Indian and
Chinese starts eating so much that beat the shit out of the US.\
\
In India, which is shining (at least on the campuses of IITs, IIMs,
ISB..) more than 770 million people lives below Rs. 20 a day. The
state-run National Commission for Enterprises in the Unorganised Sector
(NCEUS) said most of those living on below Rs 20 per day were from the
informal labour sector with no job or social security, living in abject
poverty. Data is there on its website on the very first page, you dont
have to take the pain exploring it. While the richest 10 in india own
30% of her GDP, bottom 20% consumes 1.22% of all recourses.\
\
'Survival of the fittest' perhaps is the most misunderstood by the
students. It is used to justify most of the social evil. Darwin theory
make sense when the time-line is expanded over the million years. As
human, we may not survive! Perhaps the indication is here. The UN
habitat report says that by the year 2030, 30% of the population will
live in the urban slums.\
\
Sensex, sensitive index of misery! When tsunami struck, all the nations
(who have anything like major stock markets) suffered the colossal seen
a strange phenomenon. All five nations stock market (Thailand,
Indonesia, india, Srilanka, ...) reahched their highest point. why? may
be because poors does not matter to the stock market but why the stock
market ran out of roof. It would have been fathomable if they remained
teh same. No, but they rise like a hell. Reason, Money pouring in as
aid. or say dogs on the dalal street smell the meet. They still running
non profit organisation.. "75 cents can save a child'..While when 60
million voters tured down so called "india shining" government defying
all the pundits of news channel, Newspapers; the sensex collapsed. It
can not stand the happiness of the most of the have-nots. This is
woderful thing about indian democracry, poor people vote and they are
the only people who should. Else can protect their interests by
themselves.\
\
In Gujrat earthquake, most of the relief money spend by thses NGO was
building the temp controlled tents for the foreigners while the victim
were dying out there in cold. This time government refused to allow
foreign NGO's. TOI went scathing. Its turn out to be that the local NGO
were far better at handling the crisis.\
\
While tsunami did a phenomenal destruction, Maharashtra government
destroyed the 80000 homes in mumbai slum (larger than tsunami). they
were not even allowed to take out their possesions, it was to make sure
they wont retunrn. Since the incident was toobig to avoid, how much
media coverage we saw in the leading newspapers. Indian Express was as
shameless and Shiv Sena. The drivers of bulldozers and constable \\s
interviews were killed in the newsroom beacause they dont serve the
interests of the elites. Elites of mumbai went to High court seeking
that these slum dweller should not be allowed to vote since they are
depressed. If Arundhati Roy day that India as a democracy (or most of
the nations as democracy) are the biggest PR scam of this century, it
seems justifiable (if you are also emotionaly charged). India ranks 105
out of 125 nations on hunger index, but western media still now portrays
it as tiger economy (thats a different story that our tiger is also in
vanishing fast). We are more hungry than ever before, more hungry than
Ethiopia. But all praise is showered on us, why beacause we are doing
what we were suppose to do, we opened our market to capitalist,
destroyed rural supply chain. Forced the farmers to commit suicides.
Some argued they commit suicide because they used to drink, if alcohol
drives people to commit suicide, 99% engineers would have committed
suicide by now. In 30 minutes, a farmer commit suicide in India! 225
journalist covered lakme fashion week in which models were showing same
clothes made by cotton, while not a 100 miles away, women, men, girls
and boys were committing suicided. They grew cotton. Not a single
newspaper seen the link among Indian Beautiful and just Indian and
cotton. The news that time could have made an impact. But corporate mass
media is .... i cant find the words. You can search youtube for P.
Sainath and you dont have to listen to or read anyone.\
\
Personally, I feel the pain. I lived in the village where still no
electricity. Farmers still haev to pay 24% interest rate if they want to
buy tractors or cultivator while for cars its only about 8%. Our land is
considered cheap at it means nothing to bank until unless SEZ does not
devour it. In this year budget, when goverment allocate more budget to
NREGA, rich in white collors scorns since it does not serve their
purpose.\
\
When the food prices were higher, the intellectual were saying, see this
gonna help the farmers." Did they know that 88% of farmers are net
buyers since their farmland (crop they grow) does not support their
family need? The farmers in India are total buyers. We are surplus
nation because we dont let our farmers eat. We destroyed the public
distribution systems. Not only in India, In US farmer commits suicide a
lot. Since well wishers dont want to deny them their insurance, they
made it accident. Government is happy as long as there is no stigma.
Food security worlwide is declining.In the meantime AP government was
happy exporting the wheat at the rate of 5.71 while the same government
sells it at 6.45 in AP. In my place, we grow paddy and wheat, at the end
of the day we can eat it. But corn and cotton are not digestible. Anyway
this could be a long stories. I am alreay feeling hungry.\
\
When Rome was burning, Nero was playing flute.. Anyway, I am more
interested in Nero grand party in which he invited everyone who matters
anything to Rome. In this party there was a problem, it was dark so they
wanted to lighten it up. So Nero decided to burn the prisoners. They
made human torch and burn the prisoners all over the place so there can
be light. I am not at all interested in Nero. But who was his guests?
All intellectuals and great great roman,,, champions of so many things.
What kind of mentallity they had? Eating beans as a human is thrown into
the flames.\
\
Well in this world of Inequalities, We can refused to be Nero's
guests!!\
\
\
\
\
\
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-4513102431272146254?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
