~~~~ 
title: An anthropologist-like among the engineers-like ..
type: post
status: publish
id: 34
category: Uncategorized
~~~~

The doyen of Indian anthropology, M. N. Srivinas, said that an
anthropologist is born thrice. Once, when she visit the field to study
the 'tribe' she is curious about, second when She started seeing their
'rituals' from their eyes and starts appreciating it in someway. Very
few are born twice. Third birth is when she comes back to her adobe
after developing some-sort of unbiased world view. Getting the third
birth in this sense is the second most difficult thing for a young
scholar, and arguably for all the of the scholars. The most difficult is
to figure out 'what to do in her life' which generally is asked by
someone or other-one like this is a maths question. One could appreciate
the confusion once in a while! Its a good thing to be confused! \
\
Confusion in able-indians is way too much. If you give an Indian choice
you will know how easily she'd get confused. An unlimited choices makes
her unlimited conunfused. Though as Prof. H Narayana, alwasys insists
that its good to be confuced, one would miss his point. He generally
means getting confused in things, not in life. But that is probably not
true. He does not make distinction but the way lectures in classed, one
would get this idea. \
\
Plurality, in thoughts, in this 'professional' world is very hard to
find. Nonetheless, in this world there are examples which shows the
plurality of engineers. The diversity of field they are able to excel is
excellent. There is not a field, whether applied or pure, where
engineers did not leave their marks. And if you include Osama bin laden,
the list become more interesting.\
\
If one browses the oral-history of Princeton university, Math
department, about 1930, one get the idea that it is the plurality of the
group there which was the most significant elements in there university
success. The German and Hungarian contribution toward building this
university has been immense. Bardeen interview in which He was
remembering his colleagues that time a good read. You can search
([http://blogs.princeton.edu/mudd](http://blogs.princeton.edu/mudd)/ and
[http://math.priceton.edu/\~mudd](http://math.priceton.edu/~mudd)). 
This plurality India lost somewhere in this improvement kind of stuff.
Once the great university of Bombay, Delhi, Bengal, Lucknow are now,
nothing more than some regional colleges taking a very homogeneous pool
of students and not to mention the rise of factions among the faculty.
Even in IITs which used be as diverse as India, now this diversity in
student pool is much reduced. There is a significant correlation that
this much of student this IIT will get from this city, this much will be
from that city. In some sense, reservation-quotas provides much more
plurality that Rajasthan Kota. And the LAN and internet has already
taken a toll on the campus life. Fewer students are exchanging and
debating ideas these days though they are picking up them really fast
from all kind of sources.\
\
Lack of plurality is obvious in the worldview of fellow
student-engineers. If you do chi-square test on the data, you can say
with 95% of confidence that this rank will choose this. Almost
everything is predictable about indian-genius. If they are good in math,
send them to Kota-concentration camp. If they are good in Biology, send
them to become a doctor. These are the two type of stream I am familiar
with. This may be equally true about other streams. Even on the
campuses, when they are on their own, the choices of career is someway
or other is fixed by the society. One must not fool oneself with that
this has to do with the individual. There is something more significant
lies in deep. Two observations are worth consideration. First is by my
most beloved scholar Andre Beteille about Indian middle
class.[http://www.ambedkar.org/News/TheIndian.htm](http://www.ambedkar.org/News/TheIndian.htm).
Most of the engineering students in India are from this category only,
no matter how much reservation is there. Second is by Ramachandra Guha,
[http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/story.asp?storyCode=208734&sectioncode=26](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/story.asp?storyCode=208734&sectioncode=26)
. These two articles speak a ton. However, wandering along, one would
like to hear what Arundhati Roy said in "God of small things" - "...
they decide whom you should love and how much you should love.. " You
can replace 'love' with 'think' and reformulate the sentence. This'd
also make sense, and if you are born as a girl or a dalit or a minority,
both the sentences will sound very familiar.\
\
My first encounter with this world was in Chennai, though very hot and
has the least tasty food for a north Indian, is a city I ultimately I
fell in love with .It might be the 'common people' goodness or the
vibrating art-culture. Or the people stopping and telling you that the
stand of your bike is not in proper place. Or the seats for the ladies
in buses are occupied by ladies only. However one of my friend (not
the-girlfriend) does not like Chennai, reason she gives, while sitting
in a mall in NOIDA with me, "Yaha achcha lagta hai, gaure chitte log
dekhkar, chennai main to sab kaale kaale anna log."  One of the faculty
in chennai college tells the tale, "Once a little boy hurled a stone on
the city bus. That made the government to make the bus free-of-cost for
children. It was very disturbing for the city that what kind of thinking
was there in that kid's mind." These kinds of tale are not prominent in
the place I have grown up. Children in north India!!! hmmmm.....
Remember Rathore in yesterday newspaper and civil society who was
protecting him (even his wife..)\
\
Recently there has been a strong but one-sided battle between value and
success. The success is taking precedence over values on our educational
campuses. A gold coin speaks in Orhan Pamuk 'My name is red' extolling
his virtues. The coin argues that it is him who brings harmony in this
world, else these scholars would be cutting each other throat deciding
whose work is better. The coin further argues that It is him who decides
who is doing a better job. If someone wants to be a famous
scholar/artist, She should gets her hand on him. Well, this coin make
more sense these days. Its the pay-packages which decides the worthiness
of the mind among students. But a new thing has crept in after this coin
has spoken. We have developed 'grades/marks/ranks' to judge the
intelligence of a person. May be now, a degree (paper) will speak, "If
you want to be knows as  a famous scholar, get your hands on me." This
is evident by the increasing number of degree producing assembly line.
That is justifiable if the economy is able to absorb them, they argue. \
\
\
Mostly my 'tribe' has the pathetic sense of plurality and can not
appreciate anything which is not in their syllabus because It'd not give
them success (worse, they seem not to appreciate what is there in their
syllabus). It is heroic to be Gandhian in North India. Before Munna Bhai
it was 'lunatic' and nothing less a crime in Gujrat these days! Gandhi
is the personality who is most hated in hindi-belt if you ask me. It
started when Gowalikar came to supplant Gandhi. In educated circle at
the same time Bill Gates came to supplant Marx who has been demonised by
Indian gen-X. Most of them has very obscure idea of him and most of them
can not distinguish him from Maoist. Anyway..\
\
We need to formulate our world view. Media is of-course is the most
trusted and prevalent instrument in this regard. Recently, It has been
abused a lot. P. Sainath has already exposed disturbing details about
it. He is easily googable. [www.epw.in](http://www.epw.in/) also is a
prominent voice in this regard. The leading newspaper in southern
peninsula is The Hindu. It wouldn't take much time to compare your
beloved newspaper and this one. And if you can not appreciate it, take
it from me, you are in a mess. However, it also give jolts to its
reader. Sometimes, If its editor-in-chief (N. Ram) daughter tops some
exams in 20 people class of Columbia University, It'd make a news
(though on the last page). Or sometimes It takes U-turn. If Prakash
Karat would not like the N-deal, it'd change the stand. The next day, an
article from Editor-in-Chief would appear with all the explanation. But
one must not take the wrong idea. People say that it is left bias.
Seriously I doubt that. N. Ram may be leftist but TheHindu is not. It is
run by a trust. Its editor and owner are not same. Its editorials are
not used to separate the advertisements. It has dedicated science and
agriculture reporter. Not to mention, its wonderful Sunday Magazine and
readers-editor. The best newspaper, if you ask me is 'The Guadian'..
TheHindu is 'Guardian' of India.\
\
  I am a trained engineer according to papers I have come to posses. My
first 'field work'  was in Chennai for 4 years. I was doing my UG in
engineering. It was a wonderful experience, it was the first time I came
in contact with so many 'kinds'.  The 'dhoom gang', in my college, in
which everyone owns a motorbike is from Bihar (lately the most fertile
land to produce brains, now providing cheap labourers). One of them
always has his finger high in the sky and used to say, "Salla jante nahi
hai students main kitna power hota hai.. is college is building dhool
mian mila doonga.." and other kind of stuff. Second group is from
Bengal. I used to get irritated in a situation when another Bengali used
to chip in and started speaking to the Begali to one whith whom I was
talking. Interestingly, my acquaintanceship will forget me and start
conversing with the fellow Bengali in Bengali leaving me alone, trying
to make out what they are upto. Third one is of course no group, it was
the group of no-group, The malyalis or The malloes, who were just like
Arundhati Roy were too polite and had no or few friends. One of them
would go to the extreme of politeness while visiting my place, "Can I
sit on this chair da!!" He would ask one of us! It was hard not to get
surprised. And harder, not to appreciate their culture. So different
from my own where ... Well, Tamil culture is the longest surviving
culture in the world. And the way it is taking modernity may make any
non-traditionalist take a note.\
\
\
I believe that two kind of people make groups. One is of course who
feels insecure, like people from Bihar/UP making groups in other states.
Other who does not like different voice and have some sort of
chauvinism, like (not all) Bengalis. The latter is however less
worrisome.. The Bengali intellectuals are generally feel hurt and never
forgiven Gandhi for thwarting 'Bose' attempts to take over the congress
leadership. The British act of replacing Kolkata by Delhi -placing the
command of Indian politics in the central India - as the capital was
already hurting. Probably that is why in Bengal, one find the only
'democratically' elected longest Left rule as an act of assertion of 
their political sentiments.  Anyway, as Ramachandra Guha says in his "An
Anthropologist among the Marxist and other essays" that in "every
Indian, Gandhi and Marx are always trying to take prominent position"..
A good read!Not to mention the contribution of Bengalies intellectual in
India. Indian science is literally controlled by Bengalies, and if you
like euphemism for that, "Indian science is literally controlled by
Presidency College." !! It'd like to comments about other groups in
India some other day.    \
\
\
My second field study is known and 'Indian Institute of Technology
Bombay'. I got the admission after passing through some 'A', 'B',
'C','D'. This exam, very strangely, made me genius, just in 30 minutes!
This only shows the obsessiveness of Indians with the persons who knows
how to full-fill the norms. People generally wonder about the intellect
of the person who cracked these kind of exams. I used to tell them now
they will worry about the worthiness of the exam. "Toppers aise hote
hai!!" One of the lab-member of mine remarked after asking me what was
my grades in 'Physical electronics'. Its gets harder and harder to be
yourself in so-called center-of-excellence or perhaps I still have to
see one. Any institute of civilization which can not appreciate the
differences is hardly an Institute or a civilization. They must perish.
\
\
\
What makes an Institute, an Institute? Is it government funds, then the
university of Dubai would have been the best Institute around. Is it the
vision of the Institute, IIT-B has 'gyanam pramam dharma'.. (Dare you
say that again!).. Or is it professors? This one is worth a
consideration. Its the people around you who could make you see things
the way you have never seen. I found Prof. Narayanan (HN) lectures worth
more that that all of my 2 years stay in IIT. I'd like to take this
chance to comment about HN. He does not get angry, he only gets
irritated! Same thing is with MPD but he does not bother what the hell
you'd feel. HN'd close his eyes and after a while will ask you that uou
should read more. Anyway, He is a mathematician working on networks. He
has developed certain theorems which are useful in partitioning the big
network in smaller networks. In his lectures, he'd tell stories about
Tutte, Green, Sheshu and Reed.. He admires W. Tutte very much. He is
concerned about the JEE that it is loosing its discriminatory power.
Well, he might be right! Not my cup of tea anyway. After chasting a
student that he does not know some fundamentals and wondering how he'd
survive, then closing his eyes for a while and again He'd say, "I know
all this but I do not know how to cross the road. Everyday its a narrow
escape." Other Prof I like is Prof. Vasi. In class He'd urge students to
attend the lectures of invited speakers as not to make them felt
embarrass by empty coference rooms. Once in a while he would make
remarks in class, "Most of you have taken Microelectronics because of
good jobs.." (During physical electronics lecture). Quite disturbing if
you ask me! He voice generally gets grim when he passes these kind of
remarks. One of his early student - was taking part time course of VHDL
- recalls, "He used to take long lectures. If we'd complain he'd say,
"go and take a cup of coffee and come back"." That time I was a student
He had the administrative duties in IIT, still he'd come and take the
class. A rare feat to be found in Indian University in which not taking
classes is justifiable by some means or others. He was relieved when he
came to meet Prof. DKS, DKS asks him, "So they have relieved you." Vasi
said very happily, "Yes!!". I was in DKS room discussing about my
thesis. Later I came to know what he means by relieving when the
director of IIT was not Prof Vasi. Other personality is Prof. Gadre,
about whom a prof in school of bioscience remarked, "Achcha Prof Gadre,
woh to signal processing ke Bhism Pitamah hai!"  A very polite and a
dedicated teacher. Remembers most of the students by name and worse, at
what day they were not present in the classroom. Asks everyone to meet
him personally. Even DKS will tell me, "If you have doubts in signal
processing, Guruji se poonch kar aao fir mujhe batana." In terms of
genius, no body is as great as Prof. Agashe. Simple, wonderful and
cheerful. Once He asks in extra class of Linear Algebra a guy who was
sleeping, "What were you doing in the night." Then he chuckled and said,
"Since there is no girl in the class, I can say that!!" Most 'matkas'
were surprised in the room, however B.Techs were appreciating. There is
something only a UG can understand about her college. How bad or good!!
Others come and go, few remains to excel. The only bad thing about IIT
UG, they do not come back in large number even though DKS asks them in
his class that "promise me 20% of you will return!!" He did not ask for
"when".. Still the numbers are not that much. Again one may turn to the
characteristics of Indian Middle Class. And for worse, to the Hindu
ritual of burning their dead. We burn our dead!! or We burn our past!!\
\
Third of my fieldwork right now is in my Job. Best part is that
hierarchy is way too much flat here. It was started by IIT-D. The
structure is well founded and 'infy lukhkhagiri'. Here the difference
among the plural and not-plural thinking is more obvious. People who
generally stayed at one place tends to react more to the situation
rather than responding. But the worst part is that a  few appreciate the
other forms of knowledge. Some even scorn at it. That is very
non-engineer like.\
\
Once in a while I visit some places, I was in IMSc for my Ph.D.
interview in mathematical sciences. I met one of my orkut-frient there
who however broke her leg and could not met me second time. There I had
a informative conversation with a professor
([http://dilawarsays.blogspot.com/2009/05/some-conversation-at-imsc-with-some-of.html](http://dilawar-iitb.blogspot.com/2009/05/some-conversation-at-imsc-with-some-of.html)).
The prof would argue that the hindi-belt prodeces fertile minds but....
I'd like to quote Premchad, "A fertile mind is like a fertile land, The
weed grows much quickly in fertile land than in fallow land. In a same
way, bad thoughts flourish more easily in fertile minds." That is what
Premchad thought true and if you are not close to this field, the crop
and weeds both look green, the same. Keep an eye, Its you!\
\
--\
dilawar\
(modified on Dec 29, 2009)
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-6194638297209701461?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
