~~~~ 
title: In praise of : Great Openings
type: post
status: publish
id: 158
tag: Great openings in literature
category: In Praise Of
~~~~

It has been advised not to judge a book by its cover
([here](http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2001/jul/29/features.review?INTCMP=ILCNETTXT3487)
are some clues if you do) but they did not say anything about [its
opening
lines](http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2011/oct/26/in-praise-of-first-lines),
which surely is a fair game. For if the author can't take the trouble to
carve out a good starting point from where rest of the story suppose to
flow, then how she would handle the peak where interpretive pressure is
highest. Although, its the ending of a story which leaves a permanent
residue in our conscience, a good beginning, however, makes it easier
for a time-starved reader to reach such a point. In these days of modern
hectic life,  people don't have time to think in abundance. Either they
have given up thinking all-together or are thinking in tweets. Such
humans often relies on snap judgements thought for them by someone else.
As one gentleman is trying hard to convince us about the 'power of
thinking without thinking' by writing [some best selling
books](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blink_%28book%29). According to
Charlie Brown, this book '[was all
bullshit](http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2007/may/07/books.bookscomment)'.
Judging a book by its cover may be downright dumb but It'd be only less
philistine to judge a book by its opening only. Wouldn't it? But anyway.
When the opening is great (by great I mean something I like), few will
put down the book. During high-school, in a magazine *India Today*, when
I read in an opening of a story about a Scooter that its owner Ram Gopal
has changed his name to 'Pal Gomra' to Westernise himself - supposedly a
very common Indian disorder - I liked it instantly and it is the only
fact from this story, I am able to remember till date. Next came Oscar
Wilde, with his one of many wits, "*But beauty, real beauty ends where
an intellectual expression begins. ...  Intellect in itself a mode of
exaggeration, and destroys the harmony of any face.*" Ah, who wouldn't
read on? I like the way characters introduce themselves. In 'My name is
Red', I met a very unlikely protagonists, "*I am nothing but a corpse
now, a body at the bottom of a well*" and one of the 'Midnight's
Children' told me, "*Clock hands joined palms in respectful greetings as
I came*". And if you agree for time being that opening lines can run
into first few  pages then I found George Orwell telling me some rather
unintuitive ideas, "*War is peace, freedom is slavery. Ignorance is
strength.*" and goes on to introduce double-speak and thought-crime. It
was too much for a 18 year old sophomore! Talking of twisted wisdom:
"*All happy families are alike; each unhappy family is unhappy in its
own way.*" (Anna Karenina) showed me literature '*first and best
secret*' : sympathy, '**that source of all distinctively human interest,
is what turns type into character.**' Is has been said that there is
'*no literature without sympathy, no individual without suffering.*' Ok,
I'll keep this in mind. Some openers are so sharp that they seem to make
a hole through the rest of the story. And who can write sharper prose
than Arundhati Roy. In her first and only work of fiction, she
introduces us to Rahel. In each of school she went to, the teachers
noted that she '*(a) Was an extremely polite child. (b) Had no
friends.*' About her, her classmate whispered to each other, '*as though
she didn't know how to be a girl.*' And Arundhati later tells us that
'*they weren't far off the mark!'* Describing characters! Lewis Carrol
tells us about Alice that '*She generally gave herself very good advice,
(though she very seldom followed it), and sometimes she scolded herself
so severely as to bring tears into her eyes*'. Alice was '*very fond of
pretending to be two people*.' and while wondering in Wonderland she
thought whether it is useful '*to pretend to be two people!*' Why?
'*There's hardly enough of me left to make ONE respectable person!*'
Well, one really wants to read more about such lovely characters. Not
all of characters are innocent and lovely. There are some who knows the
reality of world inside out. Like poor people, they don't wonder about
the world for they know how it works. Balram Halwai , "The White Tiger"
(and an Entrepreneur) is one of them. Writing to Chinese Premier, he
says, "*Sir, Neither you nor I speak English, but there are some things
that can be said only in English."*and "*Apparently, sir, you Chinese
are far ahead of us in every respect, except that you don't have 
entrepreneurs. And our nation, though it has no drinking water,
electricity, sewage system, public transportation, sense of hygiene,
discipline, courtesy, or punctuality, does have entrepreneurs. Thousands
and thousands of them."* These are some of my favourite openers (till
date). What about yours! -- Dilawar
![](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2011/10/3794193585985230867-5182686711789774759.gif?w=1)
