~~~~ 
title: Why I Like this Tarnished Jewel : IIT Bombay
type: post
status: publish
id: 97
tag: iit bombay
tag: Life at IIT Bombay
category: IIT Bombay
~~~~

Modified on : Oct 24 ( First two comments were before that) \
\

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  [![](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2010/10/200302140075065141.jpg?w=300)](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2010/10/200302140075065141.jpg)
  IIT Kgp. From TheHindu Group Of Publication: Used without permission.
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

\
"*IIT Bombay is a good institute, It's not a great institute.*" was the
words of our previous director Prof Asok Mishra while inaugurating AMAT
Nano-tech lab for obvious reasons, "*We are known as a teaching
institute and not as a research institute*". Well, he was not entirely
wrong. To be a great Institute, she has to do much more than taking
pride in the achievements of her undergraduate children who somehow love
to desert her when their feeding is over. Their reasons are simple, she
can not give the nourishment they want. And don't you dare ask why we
have to take care of her when she wants us? You looser, you know all the
pretty Universities in U.S. and Europe are crazy about me and IIT's know
no research. Well, thats OK! Ultimately one does what one likes.\
\
Well, I do not criticize U.G.s for various reasons. First and foremost,
they grow up watching television, reading Agatha Christye, Chetan Bhagat
etc., listening to Times of India (basically any \* Times \*, etc). They
live their life in illusions. Not at all surprising. Ever seen a page of
their magazines, movies, and unfortunately their newspapers; sometimes I
wonder whether I grew up in this country on somewhere else in Africa.
Illusion takes time to fade. Under some illusion they join IIT's, they
leave them under some other. Well, not all of them behave in same ways.
Most of them surely do. But generalization is what we learn at
universities - popularly known as theories and we are going to do the
generalization.  \
\
Stereotyping are amazingly popular in this world since common behaviors
have the potential to be spiced up, sexed up. This effective tasty
mixture is then reported and consumed by ever tweeting public. Any voice
of *otherwise* is effectively silenced in the news rooms. Even on the
Internet, which brought the hope of independent publishing, is now
highly commercialized, capitalized, and controlled by corporates. Its
not to say that good things are not there. When you want to search truth
on Internet, you'll know what I mean! You have to be at the mercy of
Google to give you what you looking for. Besides, if you consider your
Internet blogs as a social capital then chances are very high that you
will not be honest about what you are writing. The pressure to please
your readers, possible to attract traffic so that you can capitalize
monetarily or ideologically on it using Adsense or similar methods, will
make you dishonest. I hardly read any individual blog which has
advertisement on it. I feel tempted to assume that his/her intentions
are not fair.\

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  [![](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2010/10/screenshot3.png?w=192)](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2010/10/screenshot3.png)

  This is a rare study mostly about IIT\
  Bombay and IIT Madras. But the picture\
  is not different in others also. Available\
  on Google Books.
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

\
Anyway, nothing can be more wrong than assuming than all of her students
have no concern for her well being. Since the most beloved newspaper of
Indian middle class "[The Times of
Idiots](http://dilawarsays.blogspot.com/2010/10/times-of-idiots.html)" -
the mirror of their thoughts, their undoing - only loves NRI's and have
no self-dignity to take pride in homemade valuable things. This is not
surprising that they desperately grab whatever they can find Indian in
remotely successful things e.g. Sunita Williams. Honestly, a
civilization which was enslaved for 600 years, I don't see any irony in
that. Perhaps, they will take at least 100 years of so to love their own
things and hopefully fairness creams will also be out of the business.\
\
A crucial ingredient in building individual psychology is the education
one receives. This is perhaps the second most important factor after
family (and local society), since these days, young girls and boys spend
much more time on campuses then they used to be. The most prominent and
powerful section of this class is generally enrolls in professional
courses, such as engineering, management, commerce etc. Professional
courses are notorious for their lack of social awareness and people who
are highly trained in these skills, find it hard to feel the other
person pain and agony. My own experience was that professors of pure
sciences, in general, were much more sympathetic and polite than the
teachers of engineering subjects. In fact, this class seems to be very
hostile towards the humanities, social sciences and Arts. HSS
departments in Indian universities are the last to receive funds as well
as students from merit list (whatever it means). The irony, the best
university in India in research output, Indian Institute of Science,
never had a department of social sciences (Now it hosts NIAS). So if you
find any student of IIT/IIM having trouble understating the social order
of the day, sympathize them even if they think that they can understand
everything.  \
\
If you ever get the chance to read the admission brochure of Cambridge
University's engineering dept., you will be surprised to note that they
think their engineering school is new, only 125 years old. Well by that
standard, IIT's are just 50+ , just a child, and like ISRO have many
achievements on their credit. Perhaps the best child on the whole
planet. Consider that fact that once the great university of Bombay,
Kolkata and Delhi are now reduced to regional colleges. This process was
supported by middle class consumers and its intellectuals alike since it
was beneficial for them. The mindless expension of these university in
60's have made them compromise on the standard of academics. In addition
university also showed remarkable appetite for filling up the posts by
whatever best they could find. The selection procedure is also not very
pleasant. As told by many of the [selection
committee](http://giridharmadras.blogspot.com/2010/07/faculty-recruitment.html),
there is huge pressure on them, both from outside and inside to fill the
post. In addition, since their reputation in research in not up to the
mark, they are prone to succumb to the outside criticism. Well, in 2-3
hours of interview, these committee are not supposed to make wonderful
decisions but the clarity of judgment must be made clear. Max Waber had
said in 1920 about German Universities, then probably the best in the
world, that *'no university teachers likes to be reminded of discussions
of appointments, for they seldom agreeable."* \
\
\
If IIT's are able to maintain their standards with all these
externalities, this is nothing less a miracle in a nation in which most
of the institutes are going trough bad changes. But this paradox hardly
attract any attention. We are mostly praised about the same thing for
which others criticize us. On the one hand, they (Times of India and
like) praises us to produce NRI whiz kids, same time others criticize us
of this only. Well, on the more personal level, we see more obscene
behavior. Some of its students criticize IIT that they wasted their time
here but at the same time proudly flaunt their degrees to get jobs, to
join other universities, and least but not last, as a certificate for
their superior intellect and better prospects in personal life. \
\
IITs do provide some congenial environment for the pursuit of limited
scholarship and science. Since they are professional institutes so there
is never ending pressure on them to produce what industries would want.
This would hinder one's scholarship. Not everything is alright on this
any campus anyway. There are few problems and there are many challenges.
To solve all of them, we have to rely of the people with voices on the
campuses.\
\
Psychology of professors is worth watching on the campus. It was really
crass if not obscene to see some of the professors of IIT/IIM’s
protesting like much hated ‘labor unions’ for higher wages even after
sixth pay commission. True, others earn much more but they do not get
that kind of independence and peace in life which an academic institute
can provide. Salaries of professors or of scholars are really not a
thing to fight about. Low salaries act like a filter. If salaries are
very high then every Chintu, Pintu and Monu would like to join IITs even
though he does not understand what teaching is all about. Ability of
filling up the norms like good grades, publishing papers have no
correlation with one's ability to be a good teacher. Same way, good
teacher mostly are not good researchers. I am assuming that due to low
salaries, people who comes to join these institutes are those who really
love that profession. But if one needs to expand then one feels the need
to attract those who love to judge their jobs by its salary.  Lack of
committed teachers and honest students is one of the biggest bottleneck
in an Institute growth.\
\

\
The argument that there is [nothing going on these
universitiees](http://www.ircc.iitb.ac.in/IRCC-Webpage/DisplayResearchPapersData.jsp)
can not be right. Indian universities in general are really young and
going through the changes as all of the university worldwide has gone
through. There was a time in Oxford when you could buy a degree if your
parent were rich enough. [See Rashdal, *University of Europe in Middle
Ages*, p 179]. Its the people who made them what they are today. For
example, take German universities. Most of them were at their peaks when
Nazi fascism was at its peak. They do not leave their universities even
in these days unless thrown out. Institutes, anywhere in this world, are
built by sacrifices of one or two generations. Indians show this obscene
behavior of not caring. Some rhetoric may justify their stands. Like I
was treated badly here, and there is no fund for research. Well, the
lack of human resources was never been a issue but the human resources
with experience, skill, expertise have always been. It not at all bad
going abroad for the sake of learning things which are not available
here, but one must not invoke wrong reasons to do so - mostly
the narcissistic. True, the university you are going to join is better
but that should not give you the license to ridicule the place where you
have get the training which have put you in this place. \
\
Though there is lack of good professors on IITs, this should not be
taken as the dearth of them. I have seen one of them leaving for greener
pastures abroad but most of them stays. I can speak of my own department
which was built by teacher who are widely acclaimed in their fields is
now (informally) ranks best in India. \
\
One of the major success of IIT is that they have produced a large
technical pool which played its part in creating jobs in India
(really?)– Awesome thing to do in India any day. But they have been on
back-foot lately given the behavior of their students cutting across all
the department and courses. Its UG’s, much celebrated by Times of India
and its PG's seem to have nothing to support their mental supremacy, if
any, other than their fat pay packages – mostly in non-research field.
They are fast becoming a consumer of jobs rather than the producers (If
the pattern in the past was different, I do not know). While this is
also true that in 50 years its hard to produce a Bose or Raman, but the
way they are going, its hard to see if they can produce professors like
they have produced. Most of the young professors joining the IIT’s are
simply not up to the mark. But for last 5-6 years there have been an
improvement at least in my department. But these are only particular
examples. Perhaps it time we look back in history.\
\
\
As we said Indian universities are very young institutes and going
through changes (mostly bad) as almost all of universities had gone
through. Unlike western universities, at the time of inceptions, [who
used to grant admission only to a certain
class](http://books.google.com/books?id=odcUF_z10MwC&pg=PA49&dq=rashdall,+university+of+europe&hl=en&ei=sWG-TNjKJcrJcZig6P8N&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=1&ved=0CDMQ6AEwAA#v=onepage&q&f=false)
(*baronis filius* (sons of noblemen), *equities filius* (sons of
knights), *armigeri filius* (sons of esquires), *generosi filius* (sons
of gentlemen), *plebe filius* (sons of commoners), and *clerici filius*
(sons of clergymen) and no daughter of anyone, Indian universities were
quite open to all. The first Indian universities were stabilized in 1857
in the three presidency capitals of Calcutta, Bombay and Madras and they
took the London’s university their model – teaching based rather than
research based. After the [revolt of
1857](http://www.orientblackswan.com/display.asp?categoryID=0&isbn=978-0-00106-485-0),
British suddenly become hostile to native educational system and started
these university to train their loyal upper middle class in these
universities to curb the dissent more effectively with Calcutta is its
center. Since teaching is largely the dissemination of the common wisdom
of the present, we are seeing the same pattern these days. The concept
of research seem to be very alien or narrowly explored to most of the
Indian Universities. As someone has argued that the job of Universities
is to support and nourish radical ideas no matter how different they are
from outside world, rather than putting the established things into the
brain of its habitat. Not surprising, that for few people who really
come to learn, their education is stopped once they join a school. And I
still have to meet someone from middle class who claims that (s)he is
more intelligent or sharper after joining a university.\
\
Poor people when gets educated seems to enjoy and cherish it the most.
Indian universities did a remarkable job by keeping the price low – with
state support - and hence a lot of people were able to get educated
which would otherwise been impossible. This class seems to support the
view of National Knowledge Commission that the fees of university should
be raised. Why? When demand increases, prices should rise! Why? May be,
so that no ugly (poor) looking girl or boy can even try to join them. It
can not be supply-demand curve insinuating this price rise. Education is
not like production of oil which can not be increased easily.\
\
Though we have a lot of universities, India’s prominent universities can
only accept 1-2% of the applications they receive (Worldwide, top notch
university are able to accommodate 10-15%). Writing his ‘statement of
purpose’ a batch-mate of mine joked, “*What should I write on SOP? That,
since I am not getting a seat in a good Indian college, I am applying
here.*” Resources are not limited in education as in the case of milk.
Education can be produced as demands soars. True, professional education
needs more money but what about primary and secondary education? And my
dear educated friend, what could be the best place other than education
to invest public money? Missiles and bombs?\
\
Given the per capita income of India, Indian education is at the verge
of being declared costly. Only JNU, Himachal Pradesh University are the
central universities which could maintain their fees at the same level.
Both of the universities have a very active student life especially in
political debates. In JNU, during the elections, you can get killed by
the contesters talking only, the most democratic way to conduct
elections where every voice is heard. But these kinds of elections are
not supported by state. Lately, Lyndoh commission banned the elections
on JNU. But election commission has nothing to do when money and liquor
is distributed during the general elections. And if you ask a middle
class student about it, student politics is bad! Why? Well… ummm…
politics is dirty (unless I do it??)!!\
\
Most of the Indian Universities, now reduced to dust, started off really
well with an all India character. But lately our middle class reduced
them to regional entity. [This process is still going
on](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/editorial/article843171.ece). Once
the flow of idea is stopped, new ideas stop growing. They will destroy
themselves after destroying their students. Well, market may be able to
consume them, All is well?? Giving a state quota is nothing less a
regional reservation. Mandal I and Mandal II touch the deepest chord
among the majority of middle class (mostly from upper caste). While the
regional pattern is so acute in our institutes and very much the doing
of middle class, caste based reservation is not supported by the same
middle class since it is not good for their own benefits (How many
low-caste belongs to middle class?). The pinnacle of competitions,
IIT/IIM’s knows very well in advance how many students will come from
Delhi, how many from Kota, How many from Bomaby… Sanil M. N., an alumnus
of university of Hyderabad, has information to share, “*According to
journalist S. Anand, ‘ironically enough, some of the beneficiaries of
reservation in education were the Brahmins. In Madras Presidency
College, the British Administration noted that the most natives (only
upper caste that time) failed to clear the final examinations in second
division (40% marks that time). To ensure that more candidate passed, a
third division (33% marks) was introduced in the mid-nineteenth
century.’ Now descendent of these incompetent upper caste who benefitted
from initial reservation today celebrate the value of merit, while
attempting to deprive Dalit students of such reservations.*” Well that
explain why we do not have third class in Indian railways even though it
was also started by British. In spirit He is not wrong. In letter he
could be, since reservation is not relaxation of marks. The
anti-reservation stand is very selfish. A state Tamilnadu has a long
history of giving reservation (69%, before Mandal II). One could have
expected that in Chennai, you will see same kind opposition what we saw
on AIIMS. It was the most mindless agitation I have ever seen. In
Tamilnadu, the difference between GEN and ST categories marks are now is
as low as 10% in 2005. This difference has vanished between GEN and OBC
a long ago. It does not matter now. My advice is to upper caste dudes
and dudettes, “stop cribbing and start living!”\
\
\
The intellectuals who ridicule the low rating of Indian universities on
the ground that they give too much credit to foreign students present on
the campuses fails to acknowledge why great universities around the
world put a lot of premium on cultural diversities on their campuses. In
fact, the best universities around the world have the habit of having
faculty and students from different nations. In India, universities are
very slow to change. By themselves, they do not do anything. Whenever
government try to bring about something, look them being so active
discussing the ills of the change. At best, either they implement the
change reluctantly or try to find ways around it. Well the rule should
be, “*[Innovate or
perish](http://www.hindu.com/2008/10/02/stories/2008100255881100.htm).*”But
the university must be given much more time than an individual to grow
and improve.\
\
\
Enough about professional courses lets go to humanities and art studies.
Martha C. Nussbaum, a professor of gender and ethical studies at
University of Chicago has this to say, “*.. I fear that many democracies
around the world including our own [India], are gone down this road,
through a lack of emphasis on the humanities and arts and an unbalanced
emphasis on profitable skills. Europe has already moved a long way down
this road. US has some resilience still, thanks to tradition of local
control in public education and thanks to a liberal art system at the
university level that sends a message to school that all children should
come to university with a broad-based preparations in the humanities….
The humanities and arts are not the idle entertainments. Even in
business world, at least within its top leaderships, it is generally
recognized that success depends on cultivating businessmen and
businesswomen who are both imaginative, ready to innovate and envisage
new possibilities, and also critical, willing to blow the whistle on an
ineffective or corrupt corporate culture…*”\
\
In India, these are the qualities most of the universities seek to kill.
Can you find a program in sociology in Indian Institute of Management
(save Kolkata)? IIM’s boast themselves in producing great managers of
future while ignores the fact that they are being used by the top
management of the firms. No examination in business (and in life) comes
with 4-5 options and a guarantee and one will work. In fact, their job
seems to do the same thing. Given 4 options, pick the best. May be
someone from IIM would like to comment on this, if (s) he has read till
here. In India, the middle class puts a lot of premium on profitable
skills. The over obsession of Indian schools (middle class schools) with
PCM (Physics, Chemistry and Math) and PCB (B for Biology, others same)
has done a lot of harm to the social well being of India since the
products of these schools are in the prominent public services who finds
its very hard to digest the real problem India faces today and the
opinions different from their perceptions. They still seem to believe
that Math is the ultimate test to judge a person I.Q., and there in no
problem greater than their own.\
\
On these lines, IIT's have done a lot of harm to nation. They should
send signals to schools that it is O.K. for them to nourish Arts and
Sports and soft skills in their students and we will show no hesitation
accepting them at the cost of physics, chemistry and mathematics. Well,
this argument make sense only if we consider that it is IIT social
responsibility since a lot of student vie for them and ruin their life
in that process. Honestly, this is not IIT's faults. Parents should be
careful what their children want and should put pressure on government
to make Universities such as Delhi and Mumbai better. But this is not
going to happen in near future. All of those who love to sober at the
poor state of these universities in Delhi and Mumbai will be at war with
government if they make them all India again. \
\
Well, we have not touched the issue of research on IITs. People
generally compare them with U.S. and European University and true that
there is hardly any match. First of all, what they mean by research on
the these campuses is actually development works for big corporates.
Indian companies hardly have any research centers. Most of them do
back-office work and you can not expect to sponsor any kind of work. 
Universities of U.S., where professors are sold like start athletes, now
very prominent, are able to attract a large amount resources not only
from India but also from U.K., France, Netherlands and other E.U.
countries. U.K. on the same time tries to fill the gap by attracting
talent from commonwealth countries. Migration of talent have really been
beneficial for U.S. as well as other rich countries. India has suffered
a lot, not because we loose a talent, but also since the people who stay
here to study feel inferior, the output of their research can not be
very bold. Besides the difference between who have left, who stayed and
who are about to leave make them very conscious of their lowness. One
who has stayed in India, only due to the fact that he/she was not able
to get the position elsewhere, will make the environment less congenial
to research with low self esteem and frustration.\
\
It is really necessary to take pride in oneself when one wants to sail
trough uncharted waters and history proves than Indian, generally are
not that kind of species specially after 11th century. Indian middle
class which rules over all of our universities have bitten by a bug.
Lets listen to [Asok Mitra](http://www.jstor.org/stable/4409075). *"If
you look up at any modern dictionary",*says he, "*the middle class is
defined as those who hanker after material possessions and social
position."* He finds it an incomplete definition and add that *"it
particularly consists of those who consider material possession as the
gateway to social position."*This is of course quite a revolution for in
the the time of Nalanda when the middle class was a Calvinistic halo.
Even though these middle class guys did not posses wealth, they had the
honorable places in society and were very knowledgeable, innovators of
technical skills and author of scientific breakthrough. And this
revolution is true worldwide but in India its effects are largely being
felt now especially after independence. Mitra argues that
"*globalisation have been the greatest non-civilisor, especially in our
segment of world*." And middle class never had so good. There is another
catchy American phrase :* "One would sell one's grandmother, to get
extra goodies."*I myself has seen how Bill Gates is supplanting Karl
Marx in once the great Indian state of Bengal. Ummm.. lets get back to
our topic.\
\
Industry oriented research (which is now generally considered the only
definition of research) is increasing. It suits Indian also since
chances of success over there is high and and just a nose distance away.
Most of the fortune 500 companies do have their research center in India
and they hire a lot of IITians but again pre-established ideas are
forged into models in these labs. There is increase in their association
with IITs. Recently if AMAT has given instruments worth few millions to
EE-IITB Nano center, Bharti and TCS has come with their own research
centers at EE-IITB. Though we do not have labs which had the history of
creating ideas like Microsoft or Facebook then again neither any of the
Indian studying abroad has done so. Government of India have been quite
generous to IIT's with funding and IITs have executed them really well.
Doing research in South Asia have their own pitfalls since we do not
have strong voices. Even if your research is of great values, it may not
get published in Western Journals. For example, as [Amit
Misra](http://beta.epw.in/download_link/188820/PDF/) sharing his
experience with all these publication politics, \

> *Two of the three reviewers assigned to peer-review their manuscript
> recommended publication after minor modifications. The third, in my
> “biased” and “unjustified” view as a scientific peer, inveighed
> strongly against publication on grounds that can best be described as
> specious. This group waited a year for the allegedly unreasonable
> reviewer to change his mind, but u­ltimately gave up and published
> their seminal contribution to understanding the genetic diversity of
> Indian people in a highly respected, though, alas, not a “high-impact”
> journal.  Strangely enough, the parent journal of Nature Genetics,
> that is, Nature, later published an article co-authored by two of the
> members of the same group that was unsuccessful in getting Nature
> Genetics to publish their report based on similar data. The lead
> author of this report published in Nature is, unsurprisingly, not an
> Indian citizen.*

Even few professors from my department had trouble publishing their
results even though they have built up systems justifying their finding.
They got published since they were hard to ignore. As rational game
theory suggests, "*best way to become successful is by becoming the part
of a strong group."* No wonder privatization of soul and intellect have
been quite successful in this pursuit. Pay them to agree with you or
lure them into some think-tank. Generally speaking, things are really
messed up as far as research is concerned. Few Institute in India have
resources and caliber to do research. For overview, you can read this
[commentary.](http://giridharmadras.blogspot.com/2010/10/publications-growth.html%20)
I believe what [D.D.
Koshambi](http://dilawarsays.blogspot.com/2010/08/last-polymath-d-d-koshambi.html)
used to say about Indian Research,\

> *The greatest obstacles to research in any backward, under­ developed
> country are often those needlessly created by the scientist’s or
> scholar’s fellow citizens...The meretricious ability to please the
> right people, a convincing pose, masterly charlatanism, and a clever
> press agent are indispensable for success.*

Well, since the research in IIT's are slightly increasing, there is no
need to loose my mind over this issue.Though this research is not well
qualified for scholarship.\
\
Well, to say that universities are the only places to do research in
slightly wrong. In 18th and 19th centuries, a great deal of research was
done either away from the universities or at the margins of them. Henry
Cavendish, Charles Darwin, George Green, Sturat Mill, David Richardo,
Augste Comte, Edison Taylor, Adison, seminal works of Ramanujan and
Einstein are the most prominent example I can think of. Why can't we
have this in 21st century India? Any answers? And more than that, except
a moderate amount from Tamilnadu,  whole of the India did not produce
any scholar outside the university system? Sissies? \
\
Ok! Notwithstanding with all these non-coherent passages, why I love IIT
is due to following factors.\

-   They are not [exclusive
    universities](http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/oxbridgeandelitism)
    like U.S. and Europe. I was able to get admission even if my father
    who is a farmer did not have few hundred of thousands rupee in his
    account. I only have to go through some exams. And pardon my set of
    ethics, if will prefer to commit suicide than desert an Indian
    university  when its my time to contribute. I find it ethical to
    behave in this way. I am not saying that this is a good behavior or
    bad. Neither I am saying one should not leave shores to get the
    knowledge one can not get here.  It is ethical for me. 
-   I cherish Nehru as an Institute builders. As a farmer, I have strong
    feeling for his idea of India. IIT's were his doings. May I quote
    one of his line, "*We are small people serving great cause, since
    the cause is so great, some of the greatness will fall on us too."*
    I want few great institute flourishing in India and I can not see
    any way doing that by deserting them.
-   India is a funny place to live. I am proud to share my home with
    Indians who are interesting and funny, sometimes so much that they
    become exasperating.
-   Since IITs do not take interview at U.G. and Masters level, there is
    scope for those who are from unprivileged background and lacks these
    skills. Fortunately for me, this was beneficial since I do not talk
    pleasantly. This happened during my interview for Ph.D. at IIT
    Madras. They kicked me out in 5 minutes. :-)
-   If we will not make these institute better, then it will be harder
    of those who have not yet born. Well, my definition of living a life
    is that your actions must make this world a better place for
    upcoming generations. Neither I can forgive those who were
    responsible for our colonization, nor I can stand the idea
    someone criticizing me for leaving them when they wanted us more.
    Since 1947, these people have done a remarkable job keeping India
    afloat while everyone in the West was writing her obituary. There
    have been alarming degradation of public Institutes and I do not
    like it.  

If there are problems IIT face or will face will be from selfish [middle
class](http://www.littlemag.com/midclass/index.html) which has been
notoriously opportunists throughout the history. Since policies are
decided by those who are the loudest and think in tweets and this class
knows no limit in either of them, I'll be amazed if IIT could maintain
their character as they stand today after 50 years or so. But there is
always hope with IIT's since they are very much insulated from
externalities - thanks to the IIT act. JNU faces much more externalities
than IIT's. Still JNU has produces some of the brightest scholar of this
nation. That was only possible since their alumni have shown a
tremendous investment in JNU's academic life. I sincerely hope that IIT
will be the places where some of the brightest of the mind quench their
thirst of knowledge - not the one who train themselves to be marketable
in Western or any Bazars. There are other many places one can fulfill
these desires. One section of them may love to retain their engineering
attitude - building up stuff. Honestly, whenever I see someone talking
ills of IIT sitting abroad, possibly to hide his guilty conscience, all
I see is the [narcissism of
neurotic](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/lead/article834612.ece).\
\
--\
Dilawar

![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-5622907526028844037?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
