~~~~ 
title: Life on a campus : IIT Bombay
type: post
status: publish
id: 172
tag: Indian campus
tag: Life on IIT Bombay
category: IIT Bombay
~~~~

I am not of the view that most of us join an educational institute for
the sake of knowledge. I also find it unconvincing that an educational
institute is build solely for the purpose of 'spreading knowledge'; no
matter what their motto is. There will be few among us who are driven
solely by the desire of learning, criticizing existing and producing new
knowledge. For rest of us there are certain benefits to be harnessed;
employment and social status being the most prominent one. A young
desires both. Thus a large flock of young humanity tries to get into
educational institutes. No educational institute, especially in South
Asia, can accommodate all applicants it receives. So it looks for a tool
to discriminate among its perspective students. The most ubiquitous tool
for this purpose is believed to be competition.

Not only for admitting good students but also to function properly, the
university has to discriminate among it's members. Competition, being
easyly accessible, becomes an useful tool for such discrimination.
Although its efficiency as an effective discriminatory tool has been
questioned by some. Nonetheless it instills a sense of fairness
especially among the middle class which put a high value on social
mobility through an individual effort. In contrast to middle class,
working class preferred collective actions such as strike and
demonstration for social mobility in addition to individual initiatives.
The leadership to working class may have been provided by some other
class. In the past, it was the working class which took inspiration from
the middle class by arranging best possible education for their
offspring. Now middle class has also learned a few things from working
class. These days it is a rule rather than an exception that teachers,
lawyers, doctors etc. go on strike like working class whenever their
demands are not met.

The sophistication of problems in competitions has been diluted by
objective kind of problems in them. Life with objective problems are
convenient and may be desirable for some institutes where job requires
only a tiny set of skills. But why a university shy away from subjective
problems? It is regrettable that the defense of objective kind of
problems is based on the fact that correcting objective kind of problems
are easy. Convenience in intellectual life can hardly be of any worth.

Competitions produce their own inequalities for there could be
equalities before competition and not after it. But such discrimination
on the basis of merit is unavoidable. Merit is indispensable for a
institute to function; merit and discrimination are the faces of the
same coin. Although every society has its own rules to award the merit
but you can not have merit unless you discriminate in one sense or in
another.

I am not a hardcore supporter of competitions especially for
pre-university students. The discomfort is for various reasons, most
prominent of them is that in our society competitions are not fair. It
gives an undue advantages to those who have the benefit of 'accident of
birth'. A perfect example is the unease with which some people speak
about the rise of upper middle class students in IITs. In fair
competition, they laments, at least equality of opportunities must be
given. Those, who have the resources to spend time in concentrations
camps in Kota and like centers already have an edge over those are from
the lower middle class or from villages. Even if they have money, it may
not necessarily translates in to desired effects since the access to
information and resources are often limited. They have a fair point. One
may argue that even if one has such resources, it depends on the agency
of individual to succeed in competitions. After-all not all of  those
apply from upper middle class enter IIT's. But it would be impossible to
prove that among the millions who do not have access to such opportunity
can not make it to IIT when given equal resources. The experience of
'Super 30' (or is it Super 20) proves that success in competition is
solely not due to individual agency. The Darwinian maxim, 'survival of
the fittest' can also be reversed : 'Fittest is the one who survives'.
As far as IITs are concerned, they do not have any problem since
coaching centers improve skills of their future batch.

In hierarchical and unequal societies like ours, competitions create
their own strains. Any student who had an disadvantaged beginning has to
be much above the average to do the average. When they are made aware
that the system has not been fair to them, they demand a place for
themselves if they have a strong political presence. They put pressure
on their leaders to redress this 'injustice'. And their leaders often
demand a quota for them. It is not only their belief but also a fact
that they have been a disadvantaged lot due to their place fixed by
birth in a highly hierarchical society. In democracy, they can get away
with quota. After all the soul purpose of democracy is, as Alex de
Tocqueville put it, 'to break the chain and severe every links of it.'
Competition gives an unfair edge to those who already have a head-start,
democracy brings advantage to those who are politically strong.
Sometimes these two groups may head for a collision.The upper class
think that others are asking for too much while the pro-reservation
believes that they are getting too little. The fact that advantage of
the reservation always goes to the least-disadvantaged member of the
group, make reservation looks very illogical to some. Here the iron
enters the soul and dirty linen of caste are washed in public.

How much degradation of performance of an university is caused by
reservation? It is not at all convincing that it affect at all in long
run. The experience of north American university with affirmative action
proves that cultural diversity increases the health of an university. As
the Indian middle class is growing and fragmenting, there will be little
differences between the marks of reserved and non-reserved category. 
Parents of both groups, unreserved or reserved, like to arrange quality
education for their children if they can afford it. Tamilnadu has
already given some hints. It has a long history of reservation, as high
as 69% even before Mandal II. A report in 2005 showed that there is
hardly any difference left between OBC and general category (see, The
little magazine, Reservation, The die is caste). But the major problem
of reservation is not the dilution of talent but the animosity, cynicism
and frustration it creates. For each individual promoted on the basis of
caste, there will at least 10 who will feel demoralized, angry and
disgusted. In an Q/A session in IIT Bombay, director of movie 'India
untouched', a passionate pro-reservation GEN category individual, told
one of such irritated anti-reservation individual who was not able to
see any good thing in reservation, 'Bhai, tumhari problem ye hai ki
tumhari gand main aag lagi hai'.

Reservation is not the biggest challenge to the university. Although one
can make it appears as a shark ready to swallow so called 'merit'. I
have heard few processors in IIT, and perhaps everywhere, are very much
concerned about significant portion of students showing tremendous
decline in their interests in academic careers. Some of them believes
that one can not do anything about it but hope for the best because here
in India individual shows a 'herd mentality'. Some of them also argue
that what is the use of such misfits who do not extend their
professional training but effectively block IIT's from those who could
have been much better suited for academics in long term. But is there
any method available to test candidates for their long term commitments?
One is forced to used classical methods and hope for the best. And
individual in all societies long for a career on which either he or his
peer-group, to which he is emotionally dependent, put a lot of value.

In 2007, just before joining IIT Bombay for masters, I had been warned
by one of my Orkut friend that time that IIT is reserved for her B.
Tech. and M. Tech. does not get that kind of treatment. In fact there
are few blogs written by IIT undergraduates to get a proper insight. On
the campus, this is true that post-graduates and under-graduates do not
mingle with each other. And it should not be viewed in disapproving
terms. Neither there is any such necessity nor there is any thing wrong
about it. Undergraduates generally consider post-graduates hard working
(at same time also inferior. Why didn't they crack JEE otherwise?) as
well as give-up, perhaps because of their rough treatment when they
discharge their TA jobs. Some of the TAs seem to forget their U.G. days
or perhaps they also suffer from a common Indian disorder
'got-power-gotta-flaunt-it'. Dual Degrees and Masters students do a lot
of courses and lab-work together and also do their TAship together.
There is quite a harmony among them. Initially there could be a
friction, but it soothes out later. This is not to say that they are
being measured equally by everyone. Indeed, at the time of our
orientation, our Dept. HOD (Prof. Subhasis Chaudhary) said that They (I
don't know on whom behalf he was speaking) are proud of their B. Techs
students but they have seen some nice M. Tech.'s also. Going through his
profile would reveal that he got is UG from IIT.

[I do not believe in IQ's. I believe in enthusiasm and natural
inclination](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v458/n7235/full/458146b.html).
In India, or may be elsewhere, these common-wisdom regarding IQ has
taken deep roots.[2] How would you explain that a person who can not
clear an exam in first attempt can clear it in second or third with
really impressive score? Does that mean that a person is suddenly has
become super intelligent or does it mean that hard work always pays off?
Rank only shows that one is fast enough. Most of us can be a 'deep' but
only some can be fast enough in a competition. Although in long run, to
master a subject, it does not matter whether you had some ranks or won
some accolades, as long as you are ready to do hard work and give
yourself enough time. If one is not ready to give yourself time and
still want to become master of some subject, I think one will end up
chasing wild-goose. People who are always in hurry to reap rewards will
find some semi-literate professions such as management or, to borrow
Prof. Milind Sahani phrase, 'warm-body' works more rewarding.

There is very curious pattern in post-graduates. Most of them do their
UG in their home-town or home-state. Living alone and keeping the
interest alive in a boring curriculum of engineering is tough if not
impossible, and given the fact that a lot of them are forced (socially
or psychologically) to take up engineering, it is not surprising
outcome. Unfortunately it is more acute in students who are naturally
creative for professional courses such as engineering which values
profitable skills more than anything else, need not encourage
creativity. It need not to be the case, but it is the usual experience.
In under-graduation, it is very important that one should not take a
very puritan stand, namely, 'I'll not move on unless I understand it
completely'. It's better to sprinkle this attitude over one's whole
professional career. So my observation is that we do not see very
creative people at PG level (exception are there, as always!) and in
their UG, they are usually ripped off of their creativity, if any. Being
in home-town also make them very narrow-minded when it comes to handling
different cultures. They tends to react rather than respond, have
stronger moralistic arguments than of liberal/balanced arguments. And
not to mention doing M. Tech. in IIT means having a seal on your
documents to climb the ladder of success; at least in markets, of jobs
or of marriage.

A few professors, who generally lashes out on UG's for their lack of
enthusiasm in their courses, consider UG's smarter than PG's. And this
perception may be largely true. The U.G. curriculum of IIT is highly
packed and is of great quality. Unfortunately, IIT's still could not
find a way to retain them. Any Institute which prepares its student for
markets must definitely suffer from brain-drain. It seems like they have
already given up on their U.G's and concentrating more on their PGs. In
IITB, they have started dual degree program (M.Tech and Ph.D) to retain
their M.Tech. And I can say with certain confidence, it has been
successful at least in my department. I can count many M. Techs
converted to Ph.D. and it is not like that they did not get any job (the
ultimate proof of one's worth).

Prof XYZ would tell his (irritating) M. Tech. students, "Don't do
matka-pankti, first understand and then argue." And he has a point. But
there are others who admire M.Tech. for their more hard-working nature
in academic courses as one of my U.G. friend Swapnil have told me one
day, "One of my Prof, He said in class that UG courses are disaster. I
am not going to take them. So there is a pattern of both kinds but in
this pattern there is also a pattern. The PG-bashers are generally have
their UG degree from IIT's like XYZ, the PG-lovers one are usually from
outside. Most of the Profs are generally neutral. But all of them are of
views that if UG stays here for masters, and masters for PhD, the
institute will flourish. As to say that UG's are the best, then Maters's
and then our PhD. Anyway, most people come to IIT to get only one
degree. Our UGs are technically better. They have access to good
professors and much better teaching for four years.

This is not to say the there is no U.G./P.G. divide on campus. It is
like a caste system where U.G. are the Brahmins, M.Techs are the OBC and
Ph.D.s are untouchables. Of-course none of them dare say such thing in
public but in private they will reveal something more. Once one of my UG
friends told me that once an alumni came to hire and was lecturing the
UGs about few things in mess, "Ye pahle aane nahi dete aur baad main
sirf M. Techs bachte hai aur Matka kise chahiye..[pause, after
remembering that he is not a student anymore].. No offence, I hope there
is no matka here." (They [IIT] do not allow us to come for placement
early and later we find only M. Techs and who wants a Matka... [pause
..]...). One of my Prof would reveal in class that, "DD's do not write
M. Tech on their resume, they write senior graduate student.".

A significant portion of Post-Graduate life on IIT is spend as a
teaching assistant. By most accounts, life of a Teaching Assistant (TA)
is quite simple. Go to the lab, do the assigned work and come back. If
you are TA for a theory course then professor usually asks you to do
work related with script checking, grading and other related clerk-work.
There is a space for improvement but most of the professors do not want
to overburden their TA's. They generally leave them with these routine
works. For a M.Tech. (especially first year) this is indeed needed. They
have their own tightly packed first year curriculum. But final year
M.Techs as well as Dual Degree (D.D.) sure can do more. But its up to
the professor to be thoughtful as in how he can utilize them without
making them feel like they are being consumed in something they do not
want to be a part of. Well, there can be counter argument to this. One
can simply say since you get money in exchanged of your services, you
have to do what I ask you to do. But I am not a supporter that this kind
of 'money/market oriented arguments' should be used against young
people. They mostly do what is required. However I am not denying that
some of them take pride in shunning their responsibilities and
corruption should be dealt with. This boring part, we leave to
authorities.

I found out that only a few U.G.'s are hostile to M.Tech. or to Ph.D. in
start. Most of them do not show any sort of superiority syndrome in the
beginning. If over the time of they somehow acquire these feelings that
P.G.s are 'give-up', they must have their own experiences. And who can
argue us out from our own experiences. Though there can be a chauvinism
among them but generally they are polite enough not to communicate it to
you. It's not to say that we don't see thoughtful people in
post-graduation. There is much more to intelligence that cracking
competitions. And there much more to scholarship than sharpness and
speed. And of course, there is much much more to thoughtfulness than
just being looking serious.

Perhaps the biggest challenge is how to get close to them without being
unreasonably generous. I have certain experiences from past that being
friendly with them, some of them start believing that poor performance
on their part will be tolerated. They must have reason to believe so
since our society has been like that where nepotism is deeply rooted and
they can not be much different. There are ways to sort it out by acting
professionally till you are their TA's. But making mistakes are allowed
if you have certain feedback in you to discover the error of judgment. I
did over graded few of students while I was a M.Tech. initially.

One should not be thrifty when it comes to praise them when they work
hard. Although praising someone for being smart has its own downside,
but the criticism is the last thing an Indian kid need. We get it all
the time. [There are repercussion of these kind of praises which IITians
generally receive - for being
smart.](http://nymag.com/news/features/27840/) The safest is praising
for their effort. Indians are generally very thrifty and mostly jealous
in praising their fellow citizen. In criticism, they will be unsparing.

Being on the IIT  was the best thing that happened in my life till now.
I was alone and have all the time to think. Breaking away from friends
is as rewarding for academic life as maintaining a long list of friends
is for professional life. And after a year in professional life, it
seems to me that one generally comes at the cost of another. In fact,
few argues that personal life also have its own conflict with
professional life.

It's almost impossible to find students working on their own ideas. At
best they are dictated by Professors. Ideas need free time to develop.
Free time is equivalent to the time you spend in privacy.[Privacy is
very alien to
India](http://dilawarrajput.wordpress.com/2011/05/07/privacy-and-secrecy-among-indians).
Since childhood, an Indian kid is told that being himself is a way of
being selfish and arrogant. At home, there is no privacy. At college,
this is also not possible. In fact almost all the time you see a hostel
room is either occupied by two or more or empty. Only time you get
students alone is on exam time, and this is time to mug-up. I wonder
when they get the time to think things over and develop some their own
ideas towards life rather than reacting to 'herd-instincts'.

A widespread disease which has plagued some of the best Institutes in
India, most notably civil services, is to glorify oneself at the cost of
the Institute one suppose to serve. In Civil Services, a civil servant
can easily been seen criticizing his/her institute; almost every time to
prove that (s)he is a different pattern. I have seen that some of the
students of almost every institute are now showing symptoms of this.
They sometime claim that all the badness in them is caused by the
institute. This is not to say that these people do not suffer. Indian,
it seems, tends to greatify themselves rather than building up an
Institutes they are part of. For a nation, greatness of an Individual is
not as valuable as the greatness of an Institute for individual
greatness dies with oneself but an Institute lives on to make few more
great people. After-all institute is the legacy a generation left behind
for a new one. West Bengal is a perfect example which has produced a
great many individuals but not single institute of lasting values.

END NOTES :

[2] The rise of meritocracy, Micheal Dunlop Young.

--\
 Dilawar
