~~~~ 
title: ..selling one's child.. ( by Harsh Mandar)
type: post
status: publish
id: 15
category: Uncategorized
~~~~

---- The Hindu Magazine Nov 30, 2008--\
\
 Shyamlal and Lalita Tandi hit the headlines when it was ‘exposed’ that
they had sold their child. The incident as it happened, from the
couple’s perspective…\
\
 ![](http://www.hindu.com/mag/2008/11/30/images/2008113050060302.jpg)\

For a brief moment, a humble, impoverished dalit couple from Bolangir
district of Orissa, Lalita and Shyamlal Tandi, acquired national infamy.
The press carried a series of sensational stories of how the parents had
sold their girl child Hema for a f ew thousand rupees, and there was
wide official and public outrage and anger. The opposition lashed out at
the State government in the legislative assembly. Ministers scolded
district officials. An embarrassed ruling coalition responded by
requesting the speaker of the assembly to personally investigate the
child sale.

In a few days, amidst a haze of dust, an impressive convoy of official
white ambassador cars, with flashing red beacons and peremptory sirens
arrived in the startled remote hamlet Kundaputula. The pilot jeeps led
them to the earthen home of the guilty parents. The speaker, aided by
members of legislative assembly, senior officials of the State and
district government, and local politicians, threw a volley of questions
at the couple. “Why did you sell your child?” they asked accusingly. The
man, Shyamlal, squatting in a corner on his haunches, simply stared.
Looking stunned, miserable and shamed, he was speechless in his defence.
It was the mother, Lalita, who, weeping inconsolably, tried to explain:
“None of us would have lived, neither our daughter Hema nor us, if we
had not sold her.” She intoned repeatedly, “We had no other choice.”

No sympathy

But her interrogators were not at all convinced. “Just because you are
poor, it does not mean you sell your child. What kind of parents are
you?” Lalita sobbed in reply, “It was because we loved our daughter so
much that we sold her. Do you not understand? We sold her because we
loved her.” Not one among those who had gathered for a transient moment,
like a flash in a film, in that unfortunate hovel, indeed could
understand.

It was not so difficult when Shyamlal was still strong in body. They
owned barely half an acre of an un-irrigated upland farm, and it bore
for them most years just enough *gurji* or coarse millets to feed the
family for at most a couple of months. But even this lifeline betrayed
them in successive drought years. There was no regular work in the
village, so they migrated for seven years to the steel city of Bhilai,
in neighbouring Chhatisgarh. They were employed at a construction site,
and built a makeshift home of piled brick walls and a stretched plastic
sheet for a roof. Lalita laboured side by side with Shyamlal, and
together they earned enough to feed their three children, and even set
aside some money. Hema at that time was just a baby.

\
 ![](http://www.hindu.com/mag/2008/11/30/images/2008113050060301.jpg)

Their troubles began when the head of their elder, four-year-old son
Harendra swelled alarmingly. The hospitals in the Bhilai steel plant
were not open to migrant workers, and they could not afford the private
doctors in city. So they returned desperately to their village. The
doctors in the Titlagarh government hospital demanded such extortionist
bribes to operate on the boy that they settled for the more modest
demands at the Tukla village Primary Health Centre. The illness cost the
little boy his hearing, and the family five thousand rupees of their
savings.

Shyamlal returned to Bhilai, but presently fell ill himself with
pneumonia. There were secondary infections and sores around his mouth
and on his eyelids, probably because of malnourishment. He could not
close his eyes, his fever raged, and he rapidly lost weight. Lalita was
alarmed that she would lose him, so she decided to submit this time to
the demands of the Titlagarh government doctors. He required several
injections every day. The doctor wanted a hundred rupees for each
injection, and when they begged him he brought it down to sixty rupees.

Alive and indebted

The illness ravaged his health, but he ultimately survived, debilitated,
with recurring pain in his back, and unable to undertake hard manual
labour as in the past. The family was poorer, this time by another
12,000 rupees. Their savings gathered over half a dozen years of
uninterrupted family toil in the construction sites of Bhilai evaporated
completely. Lalita had a well-off relative, Ram Prasad, also a dalit,
but he was fortunate to get a government job in the office of the Block
Development Officer. He lent them money to pay the doctors.

Since then, the couple looked for work within the village. People
employed them for tasks like paddy cutting, wood cutting, carrying soil
and grazing cattle. But employment in the village is irregular,
averaging eight to 10 days in a month. There are sometimes two to three
months a year when they find no work at all. And wages are half of what
they get in the city. There is barely enough food for the family; it was
impossible to repay Ram Prasad’s loan.

How did they manage with so little? How do they survive even today in
their unchanged circumstances? The word they used when they explained to
me was “control”, in English. “It is with ‘control’ that we live”. When
they earn, they eat better. They regard a full stomach as God’s special
gift, but one that He grants sparingly. On bad days, they mix a fistful
of rice in a pot of water, and let it ferment overnight. This is the
food for the entire family.

As their unpaid loan to Ram Prasad mounted, with no prospect that they
would ever be able to repay it, he suggested one day that they give him
their younger daughter in adoption, and in return he would write off
their loan. Lalita insists that he made the offer in kindness, and that
he had no daughter, and therefore wanted to raise their Hema as his own
child. Shyamlal was still very sickly. It was the decision of the girl’s
mother to accept her relative’s proposal. The transaction was recorded
on stamp paper; the parents did not know what was written but they
pressed their inked thumbs to the sheet of paper, and their daughter
left their home.

Little is hidden in a village, and the news spread quickly. A child’s
sale is always a sensational story. The first person who came to their
door was a stranger they did not recognise. He was fat and dark-skinned,
and he asked them about their daughter. They learnt later that he was
journalist in a local newspaper. Soon the story spread to the newspapers
in the State capital, and then the national press. Within weeks, a crowd
of senior politicians and officials reached their homes, and asked them
why they had sold their daughter. Latika tried to explain, but they did
not seem to listen. They went away very angry.

Ram Prasad was jailed for illegal trafficking for 15 days. When he
returned, village elders accompanied Shyamlal to his home to demand that
he return the child. He refused, saying that he loved the three-year-old
girl like his own daughter, and was unwilling to let her go. But they
returned with policemen in tow, and Ram Prasad reluctantly gave in.

What happened later

Years passed since I had heard about this story. I decided to search for
the family to learn what had happened to them after the child was
restored. I found their hutment with difficulty. It had the oppressive
odour of long, unmet want and settled sadness.

I learnt that the child Hema was dead. Within less than a year of her
restoration to her family, she contracted jaundice. She was too
malnourished to fight the infection, and died quietly. “If they had let
Ram Prasad keep the child, she would have been alive today”, her mother
said wistfully. “Ram Prasad has money to feed her. We have none”.

No one visited them then, or since, except the local policemen. They
came when they heard of the death. From the threshold, they saw the
corpse of the dead child and the inconsolable parents. They just bowed
their heads and left without a word.

![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-3203527419604088926?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
