~~~~ 
title: Choosing a career in a declining profession
type: post
status: publish
id: 74
category: Uncategorized
~~~~

Reasons to do a Ph.D. could be at most four or five. Any collection of
these reasons echoes very tempting in my head (comparatively, pardon my
[set of
ethics](http://www.galilean-library.org/manuscript.php?postid=43866)).
Any profession which has low monetary return for relatively hard work
generally acquire some sort of respect and dignity (also a sense of
morality lingers. Look! I am doing this service and blah blah..). The
perception of teaching, research, farming, nursing, social services etc
are generally based on [these
rules](http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2010/feb/24/morality-motivation-dogmatism-judgement)
only. Almost all of the social works extract the respect they genuinely
deserve by these facts and hardly from the fact that the person who is
doing this job consider it a vocation. In a survival society like our
where every career is mostly made at the expense of others, it is hard
to be convinced that one has taken this career under [one's free
will](http://www.thehindu.com/mag/2009/03/15/stories/2009031550120400.htm). 
  \
\
This ought not to mean that people are in these professions are morally
superior or more ethical than other presumably lesser mortals. The life
of scholars (of whatever kind) is not much different and surely not
superior that an ordinary person. Personally, I admire people addicted
with something. Choosing these careers might as well be a case of not
having other options -  which in a way, quite a reasonable argument. A
lot of scholars took their jobs in academia after being denied a job in
industries (Thankfully!). And one can safely assume they would have
spent their life otherwise had the chance been given to them to be a
part of better paying industries. For example have a look at the
interviews given in [oral history project of Princeton
University.](http://www.princeton.edu/%7Emudd/finding_aids/mathoral/pm07.htm)
\
\
Even after spending one's youth in these professions, a lot of people
leave these fields when they get the chances later e.g. a professors is
taking up administrative work in an university. Few professors who
generally lashes out on students for leaving shores for higher studies
go abroad to join better universities. 'To serve science better' or some
other suitable reasons could well serve as one's vindications. \
\
Picking up teaching, research or related activity as vocation surely do
not need any reasons or vindication. In a country like India, where
peer-pressure make people make their choices, it is really hard to
assume that people will do what they really like unless they are born
with strong will-power or live in isolation so that the influence of
peers is at minimum. In this post-Facebook India, this phenomenon is
more severe than it was in [M. N.
Srinivas](http://books.google.co.in/books?id=ZrJB-MsbWvoC&printsec=frontcover&dq=social+change+in+modern+India&source=bl&ots=XMUQjUXEAV&sig=coegApSPHOtkzkrKB42jFGcvees&hl=en&ei=IV4bTJTiJYP7lweD4uWMCg&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=1&ved=0CB0Q6AEwAA#v=onepage&q&f=false)
time.
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-8077559430621657139?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
