~~~~ 
title: A Lilavati's Grand-daughter
type: post
status: publish
id: 61
category: About a person
~~~~

 [**Lilavatis
Daughter**](http://www.ias.ac.in/womeninscience/liladaug.html)** is a
book by Indian Academy of Science about 100 women scientists of India
(on the line of '**[**100 reasons to be a
scientist**](http://users.ictp.it/~pub_off/books/100_reasons.pdf)**'). ****The
name is drawn from The Lilavati, a twelfth century treatise in which the
mathematician **[**Bhaskaracharya**](http://www.blogger.com/goog_1269087040736)[** **](http://www.gap-system.org/~history/Projects/Pearce/Chapters/Ch8_5.html)**addresses **[**a
number of problems to his daughter,
Lilavati**](http://www.mlbd.com/BookDecription.aspx?id=1589)**. Although
legend has it that Lilavati never married, her intellectual legacy lives
on in the form of her daughters - the women scientists of India. ****But
she belongs to the next generation of these daughters - a grand
daughter. Go ahead read few chapters of this book. Drop me an email if
you want a copy by email.**
\
\
[![](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2010/03/ld1.jpg?w=192)](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2010/03/ld1.jpg)
\
The class of Microelectronics and VLSI at IIT Bombay in 2007 had few
remarkable specimens - as far as I can see them. Actually, EE department
of IIT Bombay has been blessed with a lot of remarkable humans. The
person concerned here is special for me, as well as for India. On
personal lines, blogging, which is like a vocation for me; she was the
first one to read [my first
blog,](http://dilawarsays.blogspot.com/2007/11/you-me-and-feedabck.html)
first one to comment on my first blog. So, in oder to express my
gratitude, I though let me be the first one to blog about her. :-)
\
\
\
\
Oh! the introduction, [on her blog](http://urmimalaroy.wordpress.com/),
She introduces herself, "I am a 24 year old Indian ..and belong to the
rare species of Indian women pursuing higher studies in engineering (or
atleast trying to do
so ![:P](http://s.wordpress.com/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_razz.gif) .
I come from Kolkata..and as is expected ..am a Bengali. One of my IITB
friends (*That's me*) think most of the bengalis are chauvinists..I
might be one of them..being a sincere devout of Tagore and Swami
Vivekananda (if you do not who they are..there are wiki links)..almost 
worshiping both of them! currently in Italy..I am constantly trying not
to feel like a fish out of the water (writing blogs is one of those 
attempts… to solve the problem of dearth of people to talk to).  And not
only that..I am planning to buy a keyboard or a digital piano too to
fill  my empty and lonely and quiet hours up with some sound and
hopefully with some music
too ![:D](http://s.wordpress.com/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_biggrin.gif) you
see.. I had brought a flute (an Indian one) from India..but attempts to
learn to play it has not been too successful so far..with only youtube
videos to help
me ![:(](http://s.wordpress.com/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_sad.gif)"\
\
 \
Well, her name is Urmimala. She was my classmate during
my post-graduation. And since she misses a brother (she has none) and I,
a sister (I have none), she made me her little brother (That inflated my
already long-list of sisters, much to my mother disappointment, "*Ye to
bhaiya bol rahi hai" She said to my father when Priti called me up first
time*). At home, When I told my grandmother that I have a Bengali
classmate, she said, "Bete, Bengali logo ko kala jaadu aata hai. Unse
door rahte hai. Ek laundo ko laundiya bana diya tha ek baar ek jadoogar
be"(Beta! Stay away from Bengalis, they know Black Magic. Once a
Jadogaar turned a boy into a girl." Well, '*madari',*who used to visit
my village, were used to frighten us that they know 'Be*gal ka Kala
Jadoo' and if you did't bring them something (money or*grains*)*they we
get turned into a girl in the night*. Sight of a Bengali, sometime
brings back my childhood memories. *\
**\
**\
First time I saw her in EE office. We knew each other through Orkut and
Gtalk. Ashish, her UG time classmate, and now our PG classmate, had told
me that Urmi got admission here. We exchanged hand-shakes and hello.
First impression, She has too sweet and too soft a voice to be in
engineering.   \
\
 \
[Our age, it is said, is the age of
equality](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/equal-opportunity/) even
though the practices are otherwise. Gender inequality forms a
significant part of it. In our dept, we have only ~~two~~ (one) female
professors. It is well known fact that in electrical engineering, it is
hard to find girl-students on campuses (still single digit enrollment,
she pointed out from a [news
report](http://www.nytimes.com/2010/03/06/world/europe/06iht-ffscience.html)!).
As she wrote on her blog, she belongs to a rare species. In the fields
like engineering and mathematics that has been male bastions, [female
are proving their
presence](http://womenshistory.about.com/od/sciencemath1/tp/aatpmathwomen.htm).
Amazingly, while in much-maligned politics, [male politicians have
granted female a larger
space](http://beta.thehindu.com/opinion/lead/article245970.ece), on my
then-campus (IIT Bombay), they are still tagged as '*non-males*' by
supposedly brightest-brains of India. It seems like the pattern is same
on other IIT's. \
\
 \
\
 \
Whenever I passed by her hostel and she could spot me, she would send a
sms, "I*'ve seen you :-)*" Using smilies is her trademark. So when she
replied to Facebook Social Interviewer that, "*She might tell a truth
rather than a lie even it'd hurt someone*." I doubted, "*No! you'll keep
quiet.*" Well, my stupid observation is that people who use smilies too
much in their chat or sms are generally do not confront people who
matters. Using gestures (smilies) means that they want to compensate
their non-verbal communications with every possible gesture, possibly to
make sure that other person don't misunderstand or feel offended. They
do care!\
\
 \
She is very hardworking student, most of the time she'd not reply to my
chat after joining PG. "*I am in lab x-(*", she would say. She gets
easily amused so If I tell her, "*Look, at the first day of placement
everyone shaved, now today (3 days after) everyone is having same amount
of beard.*" or "*Look, that guy mustache is shiny than his hair, Well
they are 16 year younger!"  *She'd laugh. Every time we met on the way,
she would start smiling and I had to ask, "*I am cartoon network or
what? :-)"*Whenever she came to FabLab, her slippers Velcro were always
unstrapped. And When she talks, she does a simple harmonic motion, twist
herself 30 degree at either side about an vertical axis passing through
her center of mass.\
\
 \
Without her, time at campus might have been a bit tougher. Along with
Gaurav, I could share with her most of the things - like, "*She is the
girl I like*." Sometimes she would give advice, "*You should be sporty
when it comes to girls*." If at home, I'd tell her, "*Today I made flats
for Sparrows and all of them are occupied in 30 minutes."*She'd ask me
for photographs. She wants to come to my village (why only on my
marriage, I don't understand!) so I can introduce her to that calf who
eats biscuits from me and other calves also. And of course the mustard
fields.\
\
 \
Geographically also we share some heritage. Her state, Bengal, has a
long and rich tradition of producing finest scholars and visionaries of
India. Mine, Uttar Pradesh, has given this land eight prime ministers,
mostly good enough.  But in her State, while Bill Gates is supplanting
Karl Marx and in my state, Nehru has been supplanted by Guru Gowalkar;
 It's now us to witness the future of our home states. Ironically,
*Chacha* Nehru seems to be respected only in intellectual circles of
Bengal, a person whom they hated when He was alive. \
\
 \
On a more personal level, I admire her courage. While people gets timid
leaving their homes, she could go to the other extreme to pursue what
she always loved, engineering. And being Bengali means that the romance
of Physics is in her blood, so her chosen field is 'Physics of
[MOS-FET's](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MOSFET)'. \
\
 \
According to her Facebook profile, she has planned to be a student for
next 10 years. While she struggles to make up her mind on *Stanford
University* or *University of Texas* and I on Mathematics, Engineering
or Sociology; She asks me to come to  US for higher studies so that
'*W**e'd go to Atlanta to see Martin Luther king and say hi to him :) he
was a great man.'* For this I have to say no, I live on the land of
Gandhi, and King was influenced by him. But saying to him 'Hi' is a
tempting idea. May be sometimes later I'd go with her and crack a PJ on
his grave. \
\
 \
Both of us share a common temptation, to serve our motherland. While my
way is to study here (so that I do not have to tune my nature of work
in academics to suit the foreign review process) and then teach in
Indian university; hers is, to go to US (for gaining advance technical
knowledge) and come back - much harder path, I guess!.\
\
 \
Whenever I visit my Village, my mother asks me how many girls are there
in my class/office. When I talk about them her face lights up. She says,
"*Dekha, ladkiya bhi kisi se kam nahi hai.'* She was allowed to study up
to 4th standard even though she liked her studies so much. And claims
that she could've topped All-India if was allowed to study. She takes
immense pride in any girl's achievements and never misses a radio
program for women. When I tell my mother about her, she promised me to
pray for her well-being. Being an Atheist does not allow me this for my
sister, I am happy to blog about a Lilavati's grand-daughter. \
\
 \
--\
dilawar\
\
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-1275216507016176766?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
