~~~~ 
title: Namesake and an Indian village
type: post
status: publish
id: 125
category: Nichalpur
category: Village Life
~~~~

Draft. \
  \
If you are born in an Indian village - at least the one in which I was
born - you can be sure of two things; one,  you will not know your date
of birth (according to global calender even though it is mostly used)
and second, you will never be known by your given name. These two social
construct of 'puranic' proportion can only be belied should you survive
the basic schooling and somehow jump into the bandwagon named education.
Education makes you to realize that if you are born in this 'den of
ignorance', knowledge and ignorance, both are bliss.\
\
\
In my village, which consists of only Hindus of 5 castes, one family
started celebrating birthday of one of their kids in 1990's. Few others
followed the suit in last decade. This first family to celebrate b'day
was a prominent joint family and the 'lucky' kid was the youngest one in
family. This family used to have hold over whole village, and over
nearby villages, for at-least a century. And may be to prove their
superiority, they chose to do this foreign thing. This family was also
the the first one to own a T.V.. And it is very likely that they got the
idea of celebrating b'day from 'idiot box'. \
\
Every village has its own character and it will be a travesty of
'theory' to generalize any concept about village. Though one can surely
typify some of the characteristics. Only a damn fool (from city) and and
a bloody ignorant (again from city) would be able to convince himself
that villages have something in common for sure. Villagers do not worry
about themselves or about the world. Indeed, poor people do not worry
about anything, they seem to know how this world function! Well, there
are few things which you could be almost sure of, that poor people in
India have astonishing will to survive with dignity and they take life
in better terms. Neither they worry about 'whither my life?' nor 'death'
scares them as it does their Western counterparts. Talking of West,
Indian countrymen takes life in much better ways than they do. One can
then get the idea by only listening to the Western country songs. They
are overfilled with grief and sadness, Indians one are full of joy and
happiness (I am not denying that real life these days may be quite
opposite). Besides, it is considered manly if one can laugh at the idea
of death. May be it is due to our 'believes' that the soul changes its
clothes and have reincarnated somewhere else at the same moment. May be
the hidden joy of of 'new birth' cancel out the 'hidden sadness' of a
'death'.\
\
\
Fortunately this village have not witnesses that much of violence as
some of the other villages have witnessed and are witnessing or have
taken part in it. Its was late 70's when a old man and old woman died
during a fight - as people say due to a stray bullet and not by
intention. Since then it has only seen minor incident till 2000. Last
decade was the most peaceful one.\
\
Lets come back to our topic. Date of birth is not an issue which can be
of an epic proportion in villages. If you get to school, you always get
one. Except for that piece of paper, no one remembers it. But 'names' is
an issue which can really create stories.\
\
Before I began dwelling into my memories, I wish to comment over a
'ridiculous burden' forced over us. When 'aryan' came to settle in north
India, for first 3000 year they did not write down a damn thing, then
they composed their first 'veda'. Now to disseminate knowledge or
whatever, they used their tongue and spoke. They must have loved to talk
a lot. This is still true. Indians, in per capita basis, are the worst
writers, both in quantity and quality. However, they are formidable
speaker. Others, especially Japaneses, mistake this verboseness and
eloquence for intelligence. Although they mostly speak 1000 words where
only 10 will do, they have been quite thrifty when it came to giving
names. Most of our 'puranic' and 'vedic' character posses single name
e.g. Ram, Lakshman, Arjun, Krishna etc.. I am not sure how big the names
were in early 'Tamil' anthologies. Even in these days, in villages,
names are still short. We are not talking about south Indians and
'Daruwalla' and 'Malpani' kind of professional names. Then came British
and they must have tried to continue with their culture of having at
least two names. Poeple who wanted to get jobs had to fall in line.
Some, especially from Western coastal areas, took their village names as
their last name like Palwankar. In north, in my area, we have to contend
ourselves with 'singh' and 'kumar'. While former is a influenced by
'Sikh', the latter is simply an assertion of 'bachelorhood', though
these days 'Kumar' is used even after marriages. Woman were tagged with
'devi' if married and with 'kumari' otherwise. Our business class like
Agarwals, Saxena, Bhatnagar etc and 'educated' class especially
'Bhadralok Bengalis' took to this system of 'binary names' quite
passionately. For them, it helped in business as well as in education.
One could simply figure out whether they belong to a certain
class/caste. In our case our history and culture act as a 'slow-down'
factor. Rajputs and Brahmins were marked out in public by their attire
and not by their names. A sword in his side and a thread over a top-less
body served this purpose. In these times, having any of these two
objects on your body can either make you a laughing stock or land you in
jail. Brahmins, by their very nature, always kept and keen eyes over
future power-equations and adapt themselves to it. We, with all the
'self-respect' and 'traditions' on our head, took to agriculture which
was the only respected occupation for a military man. Despite of having
total private control over lands, we could not convert it into a
'business' and still continue to do so. Now a 'Me' given a name like
mine, confuses others by a combination of first name which is Muslim and
a last name which is Sikh. On top of it, I sound like a Jat and claim to
be a rajput.\
\
Back in my village, among old people, I am not known by my name. If the
old person is a lady, she will say, 'Savitri ka launda Bumbai wala' or
'Savitri ka launda jo vegyanik hai' or 'savitri ka launda beech wala' or
'Gullad wali ka pota - (grandson of Gulad wali)'; If its an old man,
then my name will be, 'mumbai wala engineer', or 'seth ji ka beech wala
launda'; if he is of my father age then again the previous names holds.
If they are of my age then only I will be known by my name. Enough of
self-absorption, lets hunt for others.\
\
Lets start with old man. There is no one who is remembered by their
original names. Depending on the most impressive deeds they have done in
their lives, they will be named. If this particular old man is a
schoolteacher, he will be known as 'master ji'. If there are more than
one 'master ji' then an adjective is in order. This adjective is
generally name of the 'mohalla'. If an old man is missing some body part
then he will known accordingly. Like if a hand is missing then its
'tunta budhdha', if he legs are not working then 'tik tiki wala
budhdha'. If this old man is kind towards children then he will be named
in slightly better terms. If he is not then a more demeaning word will
be found from local vocabulary which there is of no use putting here.
Anyway some samples - 'mahoo', 'dabri', 'galgal', 'gandheliya',
'bakkal', 'kanchu', 'bankada' etc. There is no meaning of these words.
Emphasis is put on how ridiculous these name sounds rather than how
funny they mean. Actually this whole business of constructing new names
is an extension of our linguistic tradition which put a lot of emphasis
on minute phonological changes rather than nuances of meaning which is a
hallmark of English.\
\
Naming old woman are not a tough task. As far as children are concerned,
they will simple say 'X ki dadi' (grandmother of X) where X being one of
them. Other woman will name her either 'X is dadi' of 'Y is ma'. Fellow
old woman are the only one who MAY call her by her name. That is only
possible when they are alone. It is not to say that they are not named
according to their habits or looks but this way of naming them is not
the most significant. There are few who are named as 'chasme wali
budiya' (old woman with spectacles), or 'hasmukh budhiya' (old woman
with a smile). Generosity of words is not denied in naming them in these
ways.\
\
Most of the villages in my area must have a 'Gandhi' and a 'Hitler' at
any given day. Well, a Gandhi and a Hitler resides in every Indian
struggling for his supremacy. The only difference here is that they live
together in harmony. Though they will not leave a chance to mock each
other. While crossing each other ways, they will exchange few words.
Gandhi, as expected, will not go beyond 'Salle Hitler', Hitler will not
leave a opportunity to use his favorite words of 'Abe bhootni ke Gandhi,
teri maa ki....etc stc '. The 'Gandhi' is always the one who is 'most
peaceful', calm with himself and 'like a cow' for his family. Anyone
should be able to fool him. The 'Hitler' on the other hand, should be
the one who has done some remarkable deeds of disapproving nature. Like
our current Hitler, who is aged 19, has failed high-school 5 times. Well
this is not a record. There is one who has failed is six times. He is
named 'chhanga' - for his six fingers in one hand. But he stands apart,
in both magnitude and significance of his failure. He has scored a 0 in
Hindi, his mother tongue and passed but English in same year. Even in
village, you don't see this kind of performance. Besides he thinks that
the enzyme in Human saliva is name 'Homo sapiens'. To be honest, it is
the only technical word he knows.\
\
Getting the tile of Hitler is not at all easy. He posses some other
characteristics also. One he never listens to his elders, fights with
them and run away abusing them. Now these are some fundamental
characteristics expected from every rural kid but in my village, which
is more 'civilized' than others nearby villages, this much is enough to
grant him this appellation. Our Hitler is nothing compared to the
'Hitler' of nearby village. Our lacks feudal nature, their lacks a sense
of humor.\
\
Having a Ravan is a village is optional. Our Ravan (or Ravania) got this
name because of his childhood fantasy to act 'Ravan' in village
'Ramayan'. Since he was a child, he could not perform as a full grown
Ravan. So he decided that he must make his own theater. He, his
brothers, and some of his friends decided to play Ramayan. He declared
himself Ravan and went to the roof of his house, a cottage. From there,
he ordered that he must be killed by Ram now. Ram (being acted by his
younger brother) started shooting arrows. Suddenly he remembered that
Ravana should be killed by agni baan (the firing arrow). So he ordered
that He must be fired upon by Ram an agni baan. They prepared an agni
baan and shot him while he was making Ravan like evil laugh. The arrow
missed him for Ram was not a good shooter and landed on the cottage
(chappar) and caught fire. Ram and co. ran away leaving Ravana behind
(that make sense since there was no danger of loosing Sita in their
act). Somehow Ravan jumped from the roof escaped and ran away to escape
the wrath of his father Moolchand (popularly known as Mooli (the
Radishfinger)). There was trouble afterward.\
\
After some year, he again got whimsical to act like Ravan. This time he
thought that he shouldn't play with fire and decided to act some other
part of Ramayan in a quiet place where there could be nothing to burn -
even if he wish to. His father, the radishfinger Mooli, was in a mood to
go to market and had to leave his musk-melon field at the mercy of his
sons - he had no other option. He ordered them to take care of the field
till he returns. This was the awesome opportunity to do their grand act.
When the old guy went to the town 'Seohara', He and his theater team
decided that they will perform it in the field. He agreed. He took his
mother's sari with him since they were planning to bring Sita into their
play - to give it more charms. The team had a significant number of
actors since they were going to a tasty musk-melon field. There, the
team decided that there must be some 'pet pooja' before they start any
acting. An agreement was reached in record time. There was disaster in
the field of musk-melon. Some they eat, mostly wasted. If one melon was
not tasty they dump it in the ground so that Mooli can not find it.
After an hour of ruthless killing of musk-melons they were all set to
act.\
\
Things were getting fine and Sita was successfully kidapped by the
Ravan. But then Mooli came back. He saw and wonder,"What the hell this
lady is doing on my farm? And why so many kids and one lady?" A lone
lady could have been a pleasant surprise but a lady with so many kids
were of no use to him. He started cursing from distance. When the team
realised who is coming back, they vanished! Sita, was a very fast
runner. Our small guy, our Ravan, could not run that fast and captured
by his father and was beaten badly. He was a tiny kid. He can not be
named Ravan. For being Ravan, one must be big enough. So he became
Ravaniya - a childish Ravan. Since then he is known as Ravaniya.\
\
Some names are given just opposite to what they do or look like. Like
our pahalwan weigh 50 K.g. while Sukhkhe is over 100. \
\
Not every village have the same standards of naming. Another Ravan in
another village is named Ravan because he does odd things like carrying
a bundle of load on his cycle upside down tied with a bamboo-pole rather
than keeping it flat. While being a Bakeel in my village means someone
who talk a lot like a lawyer, Bekeel in some other village could be the
one who is deaf and mute. Our master-ji must be an schoolteacher, others
masterji may be the one whose seven generation haven't seen the backyard
of a school. Most oddly, while our 'Gunda' is the most polite person in
the village, theirs is a really a 'Gunda'. Villages are factory where
names are produced as well as a graveyard where they are buried.\
\
--\
Dilawar
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-7028858360823168924?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
