~~~~ 
title: In praise of: Gandhi's Editor
type: post
status: publish
id: 152
tag: Gandhi's editor
tag: Swaminathan
category: About a person
~~~~

It has been said that 'behind every great thinker lies a lesser begin
who shall translate, collate, annotate or otherwise facilitate his
work.' So James Boswell followed Dr. Johnson around the pubs of London,
first 'committing to memory, and thereafter to print, every word uttered
in cups'. Ernest Jones and Strachey assumed the job of biographer and
translator respectively of Sigmund Freud. Being a German, Friedrich
Engels took his job rather seriously. He not only reviewed and
subsidised Marx's writing whenever they appeared but also assumed
paternity of an illegitimate child to save his friend's marriage.\
\
Gandhi, 'mother of all debate', was fortunate to have adversaries with
first rate mind. They came from all corners of the nation and beyond,
and with them he often engaged in debates on issues pertaining to
India's future. So with Ambedkar, he argued issues of untouchability and
place for Dalits in independent India; with Nehru and other scientists,
he debated his preferred economic model (factory or village); With
Kamladevi and his adopted British daughter Mira Behn and other
remarkable feminists of those days, he discussed women issues and their
place in independent India - India gave  voting rights to women the day
it came into being while the 'pinnacle of democracy' Switzerland did in
1975; with Communists and bhadraloks, he 'disagreed on the efficacy and
morality of violence' as political strategy'; with radical Muslims on
one hand and with radical Hindus on the others, he fought against the
idea of a nation on the lines of religion; and with other giant
Rabindranath, he 'disputed the merits of such varied affiliation as the
English language, nationalism, and the spinning wheel'.\
\
His debaters were not restricted to the upper-echelon of society. Bhism
Sahni, a noted Punjabi and Hindi writer (author of 'Tamas'), wrote a
small memoir, 'My Brother Balraj' based on letters Balraj sent his
younger brother from Sevagram. Balraj left Savarmati to Sevagram where
he could see the great man everyday despite of taste-less food. But more
importantly, unlike Savarmati, he could easily smoke his 'sutta' by
simply jumping off its wall. He wrote of people coming from far away
places and arguing with him: someone was angry with his 'namby-pamby'
ahimsa ways while another was furious why Hindi should be made national
language while Tamil is even older than Sanskrit. They discussed and
argued the way they liked but no one was allowed to monopolise Gandhi
for more than 10-20 minutes. If someone was taking too much of his time
then Gandhi would look back and send some signal. A 'dark and smelly
[sic] Indian would come too close to the persistent debater that he
would put off with his smell and leave'. To correspondent who wrote
their queries from distant land, he would write back or discuss them in
his journal. He sent letters to authorities in Government in his usual
style of 'unadorned prose'. During his lifetime, a colossal amount of
issues were debated, ideas were erected and refined, myth and stories
were created.\
\
It is a happy accident that men who thus kept 'his conscience' came from
all corners of country. Neither of them monopolised his writings.
Mahadev Desai, who joined Gandhi first, was his fellow Gujrati 'well
placed to accompany him on his village tours, to handle his
correspondence, to translate his  autobiography and other works of
truth.' In 1942, when Mahadev died in prison, he was joined by a 'lean
and energetic punjabi Payarelal, secretary to the Mahatma in the last,
tormented decade of his life.' When he walked through the riot-torn
villages of Eastern Bengal, he was accompanied by 'a Calcutta
anthropologists Nirmal Kumar Bose'. In Bose memoirs we often see that
his Gandhi was winning over his Marx. These three men met and knew
Gandhi in flesh and blood. Their works are read and remembered but it
was a man who hardly knew him in person but presented him to the world
like no one else. This was a Tamilian and Scholar Krishanaswamy
Swaminathan. What follows next are the notes collected on this man of
rare energy who edited 'The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi' (CWMG); a
neck-to-neck race between editor's age the volume he published which his
age won by a narrow margin of 94-90.\
\
Swaminathan was lucky to born in an intellectual family. His father was
first to translate Balmiki Ramayan into Tamil, K. Venkataraman, his
next-to-him brother was a world authority in synthetic dyes and
founder-director of National  Chemical Laboratory in Pune, the youngest
was K. Sanjivi, 'one of the Madras' best-known teachers and
practitioners of medicine', known for his extraordinary and
still-vigorous institution, The Voluntary Health Service in Adyar.\
\
Swaminathan was the third editor to be appointed as chief-editor of
CWMG. When he took over, only 4 volumes had appeared covering first
three comparatively insignificant decade of his life. By the time The
Editor retired, 'the story had been brought down to Jan 30, 1948'. His
stay in Delhi while editing was not free from troubles. He was not
tolerant of British in Indian Educational Service, and Indian Babus and
Netas are anyone but humble. He was advised by C. Rajagopalchari
himself, before the professor left Madras, to be more tolerant of babus
and netas that he had been of his British superiors, 'remember you are
serving Gandhi, not the Delhi government.' And so, as Swaminathan was to
racall, 'I never yielded to the temptation to resign, and have, like
Casablanca, clung to my post for a quarter century while fires raged and
storms blew all around me.'\
\
Book writers often speak of 'editorial vandalism' of their writings
which transforms the original manuscript into printed matter which
author often finds puzzling. The editor feels that pruning, chopping and
embellishment is in common interest of readers and the author.
Swaninathan was the most reticent of book editor and never tells us what
he thought of 'the great thinker' by himself. Although in a lecture
given in 1984, in the memory of K. Santhanam, he gave biting but not
unfair assessments of other scholar's of Gandhi. Thus Judith Brown
'regards Gandhi as a lover of power using to increase his stature'.
Raghavan Iyer 'studies Gandhi in vacuo and try to relate him moral
thinkers of the West with little regards to what he learnt from poor
people whom he loved and served.' Eric Erikson, 'who wrote a brilliant
and wholly satisfying book on "Young Man Luther", analyses Gandhi into
shreds and patches, all because he was totally ignorant of Gandhi's
cultural background, the living creative poetry of Vishnavism, which
none can deny and none can destroy.' On the other hand the editor did
comment the thousand-page tome of A. Ramaswamy, a 'meticulous scholar
now dead and forgotten because he committed the atrocious sin of writing
in Tamil instead of English.'  The editor also comments of
'sensation-monger and wizard of box office' - Richard Attenborough.
Attenborough's Ben Kingsley disguised as Gandhi is a stuffed dummy set
up for floor offerings, which could equally serve, and had actually been
used, for target practice by the opponents of non-violence who abound in
America, Iran and elsewhere. There is no Rama without Sita, Lakshamana,
Bharata, Hanuman, and so on. [But] Attenborough's Gandhi is a Titan
among the dwarfs, an eagle among the sparrows, a mere caricature
unrelated to the reality.'\
\
These notes have chiefly been taken from essays and memoirs written by
Ramachandra Guha, a polymath of our age, to whom Swaminathan was a
great-uncle, mama thrice over. In childhood, he touched his sandal clad
feet, a gesture more motivated for a ten-rupee note than respect; in
boyhood, he discussed Gandhi with him or received post cards carrying
gentle admonition: 'Learn Tamil and lead a simple life'; and chastised
whenever he wrote something which was not consistent. The 'last
civilian' and scholar C. S. Venkatachar once compared The Collected
Works of Mahatma Gandhi to the Qutub Minar, that other monument to
industry and efficiency, that marvel like clarity and longevity. But a
more suitable analogue was found by his nephew, 'Swaminathan was to
Gandhi what Ganapati once was to Vyasa, transcribing and setting into
order a narrative of astonishing length and complexity, running out of
breath only when his master ran out of words.'\
\
--\
Dilawar
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-1933311958346420649?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
