~~~~ 
title: Making super-men out of small people..
type: post
status: publish
id: 40
category: Notes
~~~~

[Some views are so bad that they are not even
wrong](http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/2005/sep/19/ideas.g2)! Few
scientists or great men  (unless they were Indians)\* enjoyed success in
their lifetime. Likes of Galois, Abel, Bool, Fourier and many more are
not alive to see their work (mostly criticized in their time)
influencing this world. One could live with that! What is unbelievable
is how 'lesser-mortals' write, speak and talk about so-assumed
'smarter-than-us' these days.\
\
Strangely almost all of these larger-than-life figures considered
themselves as smart as a normal human but the normal human is addicted
to see them otherwise. Perhaps that is the only different element they
had which made them realize that for doing great things you need not to
be gifted with ultimate brain (Is anyone gifted?). Most of the
'so-assumed' best brains were scolded in their schooldays. And how many
toppers you know who have done anything significant in the world of
knowledge? It is a curse, hard to put yourself together almost all of
the time. Trust me!\
\
What is so wrong making a man/woman mentally untouchable. The very
reason you worship someone is that you consider them to be much superior
than yourselves. Almost impossible to equal. Gautam Buddha starts
Buddhism. It started in India and then spread throughout Asia. It was
*patronized* and disseminated by the mighty Indian King Asoka. It had
captured almost all of the India that time. Remarkable Buddhism is no
longer a prominent religion in India. How come this *ethical
cleansing*happened without shedding a drop of blood?\
\
Nagarjuna started *mahanaya* branch of Buddhism. Buddha always
considered himself a man. He also demanded from his followers that He
ought to be considered a man. Alas, Nagarjuna made him 'god'. Now a
learned man become a 'god'. An untouchable! In India, individual
worshiping is prominent disease. People must have liked the idea of
considered him a god for they no longer have to try to become like Him.
They do not have to even think about becoming like him. Had Nagarjuna (A
brahmin) not done this We might have a more Buddha. Praise and make them
untouchables. 'Praise and Rule' is as effective as 'Divide and Rule'
only the former has more 'ahimsa' than the letter. That is how Brahmins
killed Buddhism in India.\
  \
So what  makes a Mathematician a Mathematician. How they got that way?
Consider yourself doing numbers all the time, addicted with numbers all
your life. You are number, when you sleep, eat, breathe or otherwise.
You never miss a chance to do some calculation when you had a piece of
paper and a pencil. That is what makes a Ramanujan. You want to know
everything about electron, consider yourself an electron and live like
it.\
\
Lets take most cherished scientist of all time, Einstein. Perhaps He
gives the best arguments why he was just an ordinary guy, no no, why he
was just a guy with normal IQ (If IQ does exists!).
@ [http://rescomp.stanford.edu/\~cheshire/EinsteinQuotes.html](http://rescomp.stanford.edu/%7Echeshire/EinsteinQuotes.html)
They have put up all of his important quotes but they missed what He
loved to say. *"I solved this problem because I stayed with it
longer."*How ordinary and simple. He was intelligent with a brain just
like yours and mine or anyone else. These people who capitalize on
making people superman ignores all the things they have done or said
what made then just like us. He might be the brightest in Physics but he
considered the 'tax-problem' hardest for him. Even a clerk in the bank
will take pride in that.\
\
Guass may be the most intelligent mathematician ever but consider his
obsession with math when the news of his wife dying reached to him and
He asked that person to tell her to wait since he was in the middle of a
problem. If you are that addicted with something, you can simply see it
black and white. You have to give up some functions of your brain to
make others prominent. If you are programmer, one thread must take the
precedence over other threads if you want to make it to handle the most
critical part of your program/life.\
\
But what makes them do all these wonderful things. Nothing. If you don't
have the habit of grading the works. If you consider work of farmers,
engineers, doctors, soldier, rickshaw puller, .. same in some way or
other then almost all of us are Einstein, Guass or Ramanujan in some way
or other. A auto-driver can be as smart with streets as W. Tutte was
with graphs. A farmer may be as knowledgeable about his crop as Warren
Buffet with stock market. A mother could be as great anthropologist
as[E.B. Taylor](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_Burnett_Tylor) or
[M.N. Srinivas](http://www.thehindu.com/fline/fl1626/16261120.htm).
Nonetheless, they might find it hard to formalize their thoughts to make
a publication. It might be a restriction by language/life-style not by
intellect.\
\
I find it hard to convince myself of any reason (except a fatal
accident) which can be a reason for a person who is hell bent on solving
a problem to fail.\
\
Jawahar Lal Nehru (Father of modern India) sums it up best, "*We are
small people serving a great cause, since the cause is so great some of
the greatness will fall on us too."* Alas, none of his biographies (Save
wonderful [R Guha's India after
Gandhi](http://www.thehindu.com/br/2007/06/19/stories/2007061950371400.htm))
 starts with this quote (Do you know one?)!!\
\
Don't make us believe that there are few great brains which were
different from us! We, Indians have a philosophy which is being lost
over the generations. It is '*[aham
brahmashmi](http://www.lyricsmania.com/aham_brahmasmi_lyrics_rudra.html)"*i.e.
I, Myself, is Brahma (the creator of this universe).\
\
------------------\
\* Indians either get success (defined in popular way) in their lifetime
or do not get it all. Later, after their death, either they are
forgotten or worse were made a villain out of them. Just do a case study
on Nehru. A dialogue in one of my favorite movie 'Dark Knight' goes like
this,["You either die a hero or you live long enough to see yourself
become the villain"](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0468569/quotes). In
Nehru case (or may be in a lot other cases too) would go like this, "You
live like a hero, and remembered like a Villain for the almost all of
the Indians (the average Indian) is amnesic." Worse they burn their dead
and forget them. Ever wonder why the states of India (larger than most
of the European countries) do not have their history well written in a
any way. If you meet any citizen of India ask him/her about his/her
family tree. At best (s)he will tell you about only 2 or 3 generation
that will mostly include male members name! Worse, If somehow you meet a
Villagen of India, 99.9% will not able to tell you their 'date of birth'
(read Death or Birth).
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-8459062356485507723?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
