~~~~ 
title: Of fashionable Feelings and lowly Rationality
type: post
status: publish
id: 140
category: Curious cases
~~~~

\
[![](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2011/04/img_01831.jpg?w=300)](http://dilawarrajput.files.wordpress.com/2011/04/img_01831.jpg)
\
In these times, it is no longer taboo to talk about 'feelings' in plain
terms - at least in academic circles, if you are lucky enough to be in
one. You can criticize feelings and they will not come after you like
they did with Bertrand Russel. Game theory, economics, sociology
and psychology have taken quiet a dispassionate and blunt approach
towards human feelings (or passions). Although results have been mixed
but 'feelings' are no longer a sacred cow anymore which can not be put
under the scanner of logic. People are more open to question their
origin of feelings and much more open to accept their criticism if they
'feel' results are helpful for them e.g. a emotionally troubled person
is seeking a psychiatric advice.\
\
It is far from my intention to argue that feelings should not exist in a
Human or that the feeling and Humans are separable from each other.
Neither I want to insinuate that people who feels are anyway logically
inferior. Some men who looks like to posses a heart of stone, are not
afraid to show their feeling while watching or playing sports. In this
blog, I'd like to point out the relative merit of rationality and
limitation of feelings in human acts. In fact, some of my argument would
imply that it is the absence of 'rationality' which gives birth to
feelings (or vice versa, I am not sure!).\
\
Let's consider one of the most primitive act human do. It is an act
of  making choices. Given some options, one tends to pick one. In most
of the situation, one tends to pick a few. But in some cases, even
though the individual is free to do otherwise, one is 'ethically' not
allowed to choose more than one. Choosing a life-partner in one example
in which more than one choice is not allowed, or at least appreciated.
On the other hand, not necessarily driven by ethics, there are some
situations where one only picks one. One tends to do one job due to
'limitation on time' or by 'limitation of ability'. People argue quite
emotionally about the choice they have made. These emotions are mostly
visible when they try to criticize or justify their choices. For more
technical details on the 'art of choosing' see
this[video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fejditZYSi4) or [read this
book](http://www.nytimes.com/2010/04/18/books/review/Postrel-t.html). 
\
Whatever experience and observation I have from my life, I can say with
a high level of certainty that most of time people do not use 'reasons'
to make their choices. They tends to act under the influence of
'feelings' - an outcome of individual predispositions and social
pressures. **Feelings cause actions.**In most of the cases it is
implicit and hardly spelled out. In some cases the role of feelings are
made explicit as the only reason of making a choice e.g. choosing a life
parter in non-arranged marriages has been directly associated with
feeling of 'love', which either of the partner could not articulate
logically. Even though people use feelings to make their choices yet a
sense of rationality is always at work. A person from a certain class or
with certain level of natural abilities is free to 'love' anyone but he
or she would only pick a person from same class or with somewhat same
level of natural or marketable abilities. I do not know many (with
countable few exceptions) with a rich background picking a parter from a
very poor background. Lesser are the chances of a highly trained person
marrying an illiterate (unless one is driven by some curious desire to
be different).  
\
 Forming a lifelong relationship (with a high ethical values put on it
in certain society like ours) with an incompatible men or women, even
though one is in 'love', may lead to a totally different or disastrous
ends. Then one tends to get emotional and start getting into depression.
One may seek some help from psychiatrist. And it often works wonders. 
'**Reason regulate actions. Emotions causes them**', said Bertrand
Russel. Feelings can not regulate an action effectively. To win a war,
authorities must have calm head and the ability to do cold calculations.
A person high on emotions can start a war but he can not win it. Its the
cold calculation of pros and cons which gets an Army general a victory
or disaster in wars.\
The choice of 'which end' can purely emotional. If I do want to become a
mathematician, not because out of reasons, but may be because I 'love'
doing Math. I feel 'happy' doing math. I 'respect' math or I may have an
'ideology' that math is the ultimate science. I may also 'believe' the
capability of doing hard-core math makes me a superior humans, because
few others are capable of doing it. Once the goal is set, one should not
rely on emotions. Romanticism of math will not make me a good
mathematician, it only helps me choosing it as a profession. Same way,
if I want to marry a girl or at least want to have a relationship with
her, its not because I have run a simulation with all possible partners.
It is just because she might be at a right place at a right moment and
something just clicked. And emotions took over me. Even though one does
not have control over everything, especially in matters where the
outcome is dependent on the choices made by the other person, there is a
surprising level of cooperations between humans. It will be very hard to
witness a successful man getting rejected even by few girls, or a
beautiful girl is being rejected by even a fewer boys. Humans tends to
maximize their profit - emotional or otherwise - in every choices they
make. \
\
I 'believe' that 'emotions' are unsettled logic. Here I would like to
make a rather non-intuitive distinction. The calmness is not a feeling
at all. It is the absence of most of the feelings which causes anxiety.
A calm face and a smile one can expect on the face of a man who have
understanding of things he is curious about. Buddha is known to carry a
smile all the time because he believed that he knew the solutions to all
problems. Knowledge, thus, must decrease the level of feeling in a man.
knowledgeable man can not posses a troubled mind, he is very likely to
posses an 'uneasy' mind. A noted Political Scientist Rajni Kothari is of
the view that, **'uneasy is the Life of Mind'.** True, that one can not
acquire all the knowledge but one must strive for section or part of it
about which he is most curious. If I understand why a child is behaving
is such a selfish manner, I may be able to laugh it off and I can even
trick him to change his behavior. Parents who have poor knowledge of
child's psychology tends to get angry and end up beating them up. \
\
Whatever one knows becomes a part of ones rationality or common sense.
Whatever is unknown causes emotions. The desire to know is strong in
humans. If one can't know something for sure, then, at least, one must
get a feel of it. A human likes emotions and often use them because it
saves them their precious time and energy he would spend thinking over
it without any guarantee of success. The time and energy I saved, I
might spend in some activities which I 'feel' worthy or dictated worthy
by my social group. I may like to work to earn more money, I may spend
this time chatting with friends or writing blogs, I can also use this
energy reading fiction or playing sports. Same way, I may like to put an
impressive picture on Facebook rather than figuring out why I am doing
it in the first place. 
\
Feelings (passions) are so much appreciated when their returns are
encouraging and expected. When a sportsman like S Sreesanth is high on
emotions and is taking wickets, he is cheered by the crowed. But when
the same bowler is being hit all around in the final over, his emotions
are considered ridiculous and childish and he is booed by the same
crowed. Emotions are an ornament for successful. Failed people have to
be prosaic. There is little benefit (such a pity etc.) they can derive
from showing their emotions. \
\
Social constructs enforces these behavior. It is fashionable to talk in
terms of feelings. No one would say that I married her or him because I
had no other choice or she or he was best reward I could get as a
potential partner. Talking in these terms are not appreciated in
society. Why would these kind of social constructs were made in the
first place. Why is it considered ethical that a man and woman should
stay together all their lives once married? Surely, it is good for
children, the next generation! It is also helpful when mobility was low
and  are few options were available. Most importantly, developing a
understanding takes a lot of time. If a couple has developed an
understanding then they have to start afresh and will loose all their
'emotional investment' - so they prefer to stick around. Those who can
not develop an understating would still carry together for their
children. Telling so much to everyone (or even to oneself) is costly and
there is no guarantee that they will appreciate the reason. Besides
emotional statements are consumed more rapidly by public than logical
ones. A badly written poem generally have much more influence than a
logically superb essay. To control a crowd is equivalent of having
power. So why should any religious or spiritual leader turn to logic
when he can spellbound his listener using emotional statements. No body
like to listen to a logicians. To seek power, one must give people what
they want. I must tell them what they like to listen. They will thank me
if I tell them what they are already convinced of. In a group where
Pakistan is deeply hated, I will hold no influence if I were to say
things logically. But I start preaching emotional stuff which has
nothing to do the points at hand, I'll have a strong influence over
them.\
\
People like to avoid complex logic. It is much more easy for them to see
things black and white - right or wrong. In fact they like to take it as
a sign of their intelligence. One often preach that this is 'morally
right' without giving many reasons or giving only those which will
enforce what is being preached.  Once convinced that this is ethical, no
one suppose to doubts ethics next day and  thus a system of belief is
started. It helps society in many ways. People are less confused and
there is some harmony in their actions. They are easy to control now.
But the cost is often a reduced rationality in society. 
\
No matter how much knowledge human race would acquire, all of us will be
ignorant of something. Feelings are here to stay. The world I wish to
see where emotions are strong but not destructive. Where everyone is
convinced of their limitations. As Russel said, '**because they
[emotions] are acknowledged, they lead no deception either of oneself or
of others. Such a world would include love and friendship and the
pursuit of art and knowledge.'**\
\
PS : I believe that 'abstract reasoning' which is the mother of all
reasoning is a defense mechanism against the pain feelings cause.
Empirically, one can prove it by noting that how many philosophers are
known live 'emotionally painless' life?
\
--
Dilawar
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-6656335890585683891?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
