~~~~ 
title: Man Booker Prize 2011
type: post
status: publish
id: 156
category: Uncategorized
~~~~

Over years, quality of fiction may have gone down a bit. There are few
equivalents of Rabindranath Tagore, George Orwell and Tolstoy. But the
quality of awards surely have nosedived. The Observer, writing in its
editorial two days ago wonders if 'James Joyce have ever made the Man
Booker shortlist?' We all know that its NO! If wonders 'if the current
crop of judges had anything to do with it.' May be one would have
expected '*A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man*' to be on the list,
but '*Ulysses*? Not a chance'. Observer laments that '[Readability is
the watchword of this year's
panel](http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2011/oct/16/observer-editorial-man-booker-prize)'.\
\
Why there is such a decline? If the awards the reflecting the taste of
consumer then one wonders if taste of generation have gone down? Often
tastes of generation changes dramatically. A novel Lolita, banned by one
generation was awarded Nobel Prize by the next. So a generation dirt
could become next generation art! But how about changes during a
generation. Why like of Dan Brown and Paulo Coelho replace Orhan Pamuk
or R K Narayanan?\
\
Guardian thinks that, '*maybe it says something about our culture that
it has become strangely unfashionable to suggest that great novels
shouldn't only be a quick fix, another consumer experience, that they
should make us work and reward us for our effort by staying with us,
leaving a bit of intellectual and emotional residue.*' Well, lover of
Chetan Bhagat and his ilk have always argued on these lines.\
\
For ordinary 'people like us' its hard to understand the difference
between mediocrity and genius. In fact, when I was 18, Dan Brown tasted
much better than R K Narayanan. Today, it is not possible for me to say
confidently why 'The White Tiger' has to win over 'Sea of Poppies' in
2008. Both tasted equally good to me. And their critics did not make
much sense to me either. But one fact about Booker I can surely
question, why a MI5-cop, a politician and two journalists have to be on
the jury while the best of literary figures, well suited to recognise
and award their peers, are available? After all, award is the
recognition of one's achievements by one's peer, not a thing which has
to be influenced by the forces of market! Or are they?
![](https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/3794193585985230867-495875600212179123?l=dilawarsays.blogspot.com)
